Article 1
Title: Name and Territory of the Union
Content: (1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States.
(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as specified in the First Schedule.
(3) The territory of India shall comprise:
  1. The territories of the States;
  2. The Union territories specified in the First Schedule; and
  3. Such other territories as may be acquired.

Article 2
Title: Admission or Establishment of New States
Content: Parliament may by law admit into the Union, or establish, new States on such terms and conditions, as it thinks fit.

Article 2A
Title: Sikkim to be Associated with the Union
Content: Sikkim shall be associated with the Union of India by virtue of the Constitution Thirty-Sixth Amendment Act, 1975. This amendment came into effect on April 26, 1975.
Amendments in Article no. Article 2A:
Amendment no.: Constitution Thirty-Sixth Amendment Act, 1975
Date of amendment: April 26, 1975
Description: Introduced Article 2A to associate Sikkim with the Union of India.

Article 3
Title: Formation of New States and Alteration of Areas, Boundaries, or Names of Existing States
Content: Parliament may by law (a) form a new State by separation of territory from any State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States, or by uniting any territory to a part of any State; (b) increase the area of any State; (c) diminish the area of any State; (d) alter the boundaries of any State; (e) alter the name of any State. Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President and unless, where the proposal contained in the Bill affects the area, boundaries, or name of any of the States, the Bill has been referred by the President to the Legislature of that State for expressing its views thereon.

Article 4
Title: Laws Made Under Articles 2 and 3 to Provide for the Amendment of the First and the Fourth Schedules and Supplemental, Incidental, and Consequential Matters
Content: Any law referred to in Article 2 or Article 3 shall contain provisions for the amendment of the First Schedule and the Fourth Schedule as necessary to give effect to the law. The law may also include supplemental, incidental, and consequential provisions, including provisions about representation in Parliament and State Legislatures.

Article 5
Title: Citizenship at the Commencement of the Constitution
Content: At the commencement of this Constitution, every person who has their domicile in the territory of India and: (a) was born in the territory of India; or (b) either of whose parents was born in the territory of India; or (c) has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for not less than five years preceding such commencement, shall be a citizen of India.

Article 6
Title: Rights of Citizenship of Certain Persons Who Have Migrated to India from Pakistan
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 5, a person who has migrated to the territory of India from the territory now included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the commencement of this Constitution if: (a) he or either of his parents or any of his grandparents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935; and (b) in the case where such person has migrated before the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India since the date of his migration, or (c) in the case where such person has migrated on or after the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been registered as a citizen of India by an officer appointed by the Government of India.

Article 7
Title: Rights of Citizenship of Certain Migrants to Pakistan
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Articles 5 and 6, a person who has migrated from the territory of India to the territory now included in Pakistan after the first day of March, 1947, shall not be deemed to be a citizen of India. However, this provision does not apply to a person who, after migrating to Pakistan, returns to India under a permit for resettlement or permanent return.

Article 8
Title: Rights of Citizenship of Certain Persons of Indian Origin Residing Outside India
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 5, any person who or either of whose parents or any of whose grandparents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted), and who is ordinarily residing in any country outside India as so defined, shall be deemed to be a citizen of India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the country where he is for the time being residing, on an application made by him therefor to such diplomatic or consular representative, whether before or after the commencement of this Constitution, in the form and manner prescribed by the Government of the Dominion of India or the Government of India.

Article 9
Title: Persons Voluntarily Acquiring Citizenship of a Foreign State Not to be Citizens
Content: No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of Article 5, or be deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue of Article 6 or Article 8, if he has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign State.

Article 10
Title: Continuance of the Rights of Citizenship
Content: Every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India under any of the foregoing provisions of this Part shall, subject to the provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament, continue to be such citizen.

Article 11
Title: Parliament to Regulate the Right of Citizenship by Law
Content: Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall derogate from the power of Parliament to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to citizenship.

Article 12
Title: Definition of the State
Content: In this part, unless the context otherwise requires, the State includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.

Article 13
Title: Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights
Content: (1) All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.
(3) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires, law includes any Ordinance, order, bye law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usages having in the territory of India the force of law; laws in force includes laws passed or made by Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that any such law or any part thereof may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas.
(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any amendment of this Constitution made under Article 368.

Article 14
Title: Equality before law
Content: The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.

Article 15
Title: Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth
Content: (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and palaces of public entertainment; or the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children.
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

Article 16
Title: Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment
Content: (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence, or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union territory prior to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favor of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which provides that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious or denominational institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination.

Article 17
Title: Abolition of Untouchability
Content: Untouchability is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability arising out of Untouchability shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.

Article 18
Title: Abolition of Titles
Content: No title, not being a military or academic distinction, shall be conferred by the State. No citizen of India shall accept any title from any foreign State. No person who is not a citizen of India shall, while he holds any office of profit or trust under the State, accept without the consent of the President any title from any foreign State. No person holding any office of profit or trust under the State shall, without the consent of the President, accept any present, emolument, or office of any kind from or under any foreign State.

Article 19
Title: Protection of Certain Rights Regarding Freedom of Speech, etc.
Content: All citizens shall have the right:
(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
(b) to assemble peaceably and without arms;
(c) to form associations or unions;
(d) to move freely throughout the territory of India;
(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India; and
(f) omitted.
(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.

(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (b) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India or public order, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause.
(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India or public order or morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause.
(5) Nothing in sub-clauses (d) and (e) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of any of the rights conferred by the said sub-clauses either in the interests of the general public or for the protection of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe.
(6) Nothing in sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the general public, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause, and, in particular, nothing in the said sub-clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from making any law relating to,
(i) the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business, or
(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by the State, of any trade, business, industry or service, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise.

Article 20
Title: Protection in Respect of Conviction for Offences
Content: (1) No person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of the law in force at the time of the commission of the act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence.
(2) No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once.
(3) No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself.

Article 21
Title: Protection of Life and Personal Liberty
Content: No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.

Article 22
Title: Protection against Arrest and Detention
Content: (1) No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice.
(2) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period without the authority of a magistrate.
(3) Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall apply—
(a) to any person who for the time being is an enemy alien; or
(b) to any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive detention.
(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for a longer period than three months unless—
(a) an Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges of a High Court has reported before the expiration of the said period of three months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention.
(b) such person is detained in accordance with the provisions of any law made by Parliament.

Article 23
Title: Prohibition of Traffic in Human Beings and Forced Labour
Content: (1) Traffic in human beings and begar and other similar forms of forced labour are prohibited and any contravention of this provision shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from imposing compulsory service for public purposes, and in imposing such service the State shall not make any discrimination on grounds only of religion, race, caste or class or any of them.

Article 24
Title: Prohibition of Employment of Children in Factories, etc.
Content: (1) No child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.
(2) Nothing in this article shall apply to any of the activities mentioned in clause (2) of Article 23.

Article 25
Title: Freedom of Conscience and Free Profession, Practice and Propagation of Religion
Content: (1) Subject to public order, morality, and health, and to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right to freely profess, practice, and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political, or other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice.

Article 26
Title: Freedom to Manage Religious Affairs
Content: (1) Subject to public order, morality, and health, every religious denomination or any section thereof shall have the right
(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes;
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property; and
(d) to administer such property in accordance with law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice; and
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.

Article 27
Title: Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion
Content: (1) No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of which are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination.
(2) No person shall be liable to pay any tax levied by the State or by any municipality or other local authority within the territory of India for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination.

Article 28
Title: Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in certain educational institutions
Content: (1) No religious instruction shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out of State funds.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to an educational institution which is administered by the State but has been established under any endowment or trust which requires that religious instruction shall be imparted in such institution.
(3) No person attending any educational institution recognized by the State or receiving aid out of State funds shall be required to take part in any religious instruction that may be imparted in such institution or to attend any religious worship that may be conducted in such institution without his consent.

Article 29
Title: Protection of interests of minorities
Content: (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same.
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.

Article 30
Title: Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions
Content: (1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of any property of an educational institution established and administered by a minority, referred to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.
(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions, discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is under the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language.

Article 31A
Title: Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.
Content: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Article 13, no law providing for the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by Article 14, Article 19 or Article 31.
(2) In this article,
(a) the expression "estate" shall, in relation to any local area, have the same meaning as that expression or its local equivalent has in the existing law relating to land tenures in force in that area and shall also include any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant and in the States of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, any janmam right;
(b) the expression "rights", in relation to an estate, shall include any rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-proprietor, under-proprietor, tenant, raiyat, under-raiyat or other intermediary and any rights or privileges in respect of land revenue.

Article 31B
Title: Validation of certain Acts and Regulations
Content: Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in Article 31A, none of the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of the provisions thereof shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have become void, on the ground that such Act, Regulation or provision is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by, any provisions of this Part, and notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or tribunal to the contrary, each of such Acts and Regulations shall, subject to the power of any competent Legislature to repeal or amend it, continue in force.

Article 31C
Title: Saving of Laws Giving Effect to Certain Directive Principles
Content: Notwithstanding anything contained in Article 13, no law giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing all or any of the principles laid down in Part IV shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by, any provisions of this Part, and notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the validity of any such law shall not be called in question on the ground that it does not give effect to such principles.

Article 32
Title: Remedies for Enforcement of Rights Conferred by this Part
Content: (1) The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed.

(2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part.

(3) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court by clauses (1) and (2), Parliament may by law empower any other court to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable by the Supreme Court under clause (2).

Article 33
Title: Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part in their application to forces, etc.
Content: Parliament may, by law, determine to what extent any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their application to the armed forces or the forces charged with the maintenance of public order, be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them.

Article 34
Title: Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is in force in any area
Content: Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, Parliament may by law indemnify any person in the service of the Union or of a State or any other person in respect of any act done by him in connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area within the territory of India where martial law was in force or validate any sentence passed, punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered or other act done under martial law in such area.

Article 35
Title: Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,
(a) Parliament shall have, and the Legislature of a State shall not have, power to make laws—
(i) with respect to any of the matters which under clause ( 3 ) of Article 16, clause ( 3 ) of Article 32, Article 33 and Article 34 may be provided for by law made by Parliament; and
(ii) for prescribing punishment for those acts which are declared to be offences under this Part,
(b) any law in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution with respect to any of the matters referred to in sub clause (a) or sub clause ( b ) of clause ( 2 ) of Article 34 shall, subject to the terms thereof and to any adaptations and modifications that may be made therein under Article 372, continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by Parliament.

Article 36
Title: Definition
Content: In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the State has the same meaning as in Part III.

Article 37
Title: Application of the principles contained in this Part
Content: The provisions contained in this Part shall not be enforceable by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws.

Article 38
Title: State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people
Content: The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life.

Article 39
Title: Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State
Content: (a) The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood;
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment;
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;
(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral and material abandonment.

Article 40
Title: Organisation of village panchayats
Content: The State shall take steps to organise village panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.

Article 41
Title: Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases
Content: The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.

Article 42
Title: Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief
Content: The State shall make provision for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief.

Article 43
Title: Living wage, etc., for workers
Content: The State shall endeavor to secure, by suitable legislation or economic organization or in any other way, to all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State shall endeavor to promote cottage industries on an individual or co-operative basis in rural areas.

Article 44
Title: Uniform civil code for the citizens
Content: The State shall endeavor to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.

Article 45
Title: Provision for free and compulsory education for children
Content: The State shall endeavor to provide, within a period of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all children until they complete the age of fourteen years.

Article 46
Title: Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and other weaker sections
Content: The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.

Article 47
Title: Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health
Content: The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health.

Article 48
Title: Organization of agriculture and animal husbandry
Content: The State shall endeavor to organize agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.

Article 48A
Title: Protection and improvement of environment and safeguarding of forests and wildlife
Content: The State shall endeavor to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country.

Article 49
Title: Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance
Content: It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest, declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance, from spoliation, disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.

Article 50
Title: Separation of judiciary from executive
Content: The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State.

Article 51
Title: Promotion of international peace and security
Content: The State shall endeavour to
(a) promote international peace and security;
(b) maintain just and honourable relations between nations;
(c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organized peoples with one another; and
(d) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.

Article 51A
Title: Fundamental duties
Content: It shall be the duty of every citizen of India
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife, and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement.

Article 52
Title: President of India
Content: There shall be a President of India who shall be the Head of State and shall exercise the powers and functions conferred by this Constitution and the law.

Article 53
Title: Executive power of the Union
Content: The executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.

Article 54
Title: Election of President
Content: The President of India shall be elected by an Electoral College consisting of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament and of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.

Article 55
Title: Manner of Election of President
Content: As per Article 55, the manner of election of the President shall be as follows:

(a) Every candidate for election as President shall have a nomination paper signed by at least fifty electors and a deposit of such sum as may be specified.
(b) The election shall be held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

Article 56
Title: Term of Office of President
Content: According to Article 56, the term of office of the President shall be five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. However, a President can continue to hold office beyond the expiry of the term until a successor assumes office.

Article 57
Title: Election of Vice President
Content: Article 57 states that the Vice President of India shall be elected by an electoral college consisting of members of both Houses of Parliament. The election process is conducted through a single transferable vote by secret ballot.

Article 58
Title: Qualifications for election as President
Content: Article 58 outlines the qualifications required for a candidate to be eligible for election as the President of India. A candidate must fulfill certain criteria, including being a citizen of India, having completed 35 years of age, and being qualified to become a member of the Lok Sabha.

Article 59
Title: Election of Vice-President
Content: Article 59 outlines the process and procedure for the election of the Vice-President of India. The Vice-President is elected by an Electoral College consisting of members of both houses of Parliament. The election is conducted through a single transferable vote system.

Article 60
Title: Oath or affirmation by the President
Content: Article 60 mandates that the President of India, before entering upon his/her office, must take an oath or make an affirmation in the presence of the Chief Justice of India or, in their absence, the senior-most judge of the Supreme Court. This oath signifies the President's commitment to uphold the Constitution and faithfully execute the duties of the office.

Article 61
Title: Procedure for impeachment of the President
Content: Article 61 outlines the process for impeaching the President of India on grounds of violating the Constitution. The process can be initiated in either House of Parliament by presenting a written proposal signed by a minimum of one-fourth of the total members of that House. After the proposal is submitted, an investigation is conducted by a special committee formed by the Chairperson of the Rajya Sabha or the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. If the committee recommends impeachment, a motion for removal is introduced and discussed in the originating House. A two-thirds majority of the total members present and voting is required in each House for the President's removal.

Article 62
Title: Time limit for re-election
Content: Article 62 of the Constitution of India sets a time limit for re-election of members of either House of Parliament after their disqualification due to certain reasons. If a member is disqualified and the disqualification is removed by a competent authority, they can stand for re-election within six months from the date of removal of disqualification. However, if the remainder of the term of the House is less than six months, the re-election is not necessary.

Article 63
Title: Disqualification for Membership of Parliament
Content: Article 63 of the Constitution of India outlines the grounds on which a person can be disqualified from being a member of either House of Parliament. A person can be disqualified if they hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the government of any state or union territory, other than an office declared not to disqualify its holder by a law made by Parliament.

Article 64
Title: The Vice-President of India
Content: Article 64 of the Constitution of India establishes the office of the Vice-President of India. The Vice-President is the second-highest constitutional office in the country, after the President. The Vice-President is elected by an electoral college consisting of members of both Houses of Parliament, and their term of office is five years.

Article 65
Title: The Election of the Vice-President
Content: Article 65 of the Constitution of India lays out the procedure for the election of the Vice-President of India. The Vice-President is elected by an electoral college consisting of members of both Houses of Parliament, which includes both elected and nominated members.

Article 66
Title: Election of the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha
Content: Article 66 of the Constitution of India pertains to the election of the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, which is the upper house of the Parliament of India. The Deputy Chairman is elected by the members of the Rajya Sabha from among themselves.

Article 67
Title: Election of Vice-President
Content: Article 67 of the Constitution of India deals with the election of the Vice-President of India, who is the second-highest constitutional office in the country. The Vice-President is elected by an electoral college composed of members of both houses of Parliament.

Article 68
Title: Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy
Content: Article 68 of the Constitution of India deals with the time of holding an election to fill a vacancy in the office of the Vice-President of India and the term of office of a person elected to fill a casual vacancy.

Article 69
Title: Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President
Content: Article 69 of the Constitution of India pertains to the oath or affirmation that the Vice-President of India takes upon assuming office.

Article 70
Title: Proclamation of Emergency (Extension)
Content: If the President, on receipt of a report from the Government of a State or otherwise, is satisfied that the security of the State is threatened by internal disturbance, he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect.

The Proclamation may be made before the actual occurrence of the disturbance or at any time thereafter.

The Proclamation shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall cease to operate at the expiration of a period of six weeks from the date of its publication, unless before the expiration of that period resolutions approving it have been passed by both Houses of Parliament.

If a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by both Houses of Parliament, the Proclamation shall continue in operation for a further period of six weeks from the date on which such resolution was passed or for such shorter period as may be specified in the resolution.

So long as a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the President may by order direct that the provisions of any one or more of the Fundamental Rights specified in Article 19 shall be suspended in the whole or any part of the territory of India.

Article 71
Title: Proclamation of Emergency (Continuance in force beyond one year)
Content: Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the Proclamation of Emergency may be continued in force beyond a period of one year only by or with the approval of Parliament:

Provided that a Proclamation of Emergency so continued in force shall not remain in force for more than three years unless it has been approved by each House of Parliament at a sitting specially convened for the purpose within the said period of three years and has been ratified by the President within six weeks from the date of such approval.

Provided further that if the Lok Sabha is dissolved before the expiration of the said period of three years, the Proclamation of Emergency shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by the newly constituted House of the People.

Article 72
Title: Suspension of Provisions of Article 19 during Proclamation of Emergency (Extension)
Content: During the continuance in force of a Proclamation of Emergency, the President may by order suspend the operation of any of the provisions of Article 19 in the whole or in any part of the territory of India.

Article 73
Title: Power of Parliament to legislate during Proclamation of Emergency
Content: Notwithstanding anything in the Constitution, during the period for which a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India with respect to any matter which is not enumerated in the Union List or in the Concurrent List but which is nevertheless a matter in respect of which Parliament has power to make laws under any of the provisions of this Constitution, including a law imposing a tax not mentioned in the Union List but which is a tax of a kind which the Dominion Legislature could have imposed whilst the Dominion of India was a Province of the British Empire.

Provided that no such law shall be made in respect of any matter enumerated in the State List unless the Rajya Sabha has passed a resolution authorising the Parliament to make laws in respect of that matter.

Article 74
Title: Power of President to issue directions to States
Content: During any period when the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the President may, by order, direct that the executive power of the State shall be exercisable by him, or by such person as he may direct, and may also direct that the Chief Minister of the State shall be appointed by him or shall be removed by him.

Article 75
Title: Continuance in office of Prime Minister, Ministers, etc., during Proclamation of Emergency
Content: During the continuance in force of a Proclamation of Emergency, the Prime Minister and the other Ministers of the Union shall continue to hold office notwithstanding the expiration of the term of their office under Article 75 or 76:

Provided that, if the Lok Sabha is dissolved before the expiration of the said term, they shall continue to hold office until the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution.

Article 76
Title: Ministers of Union to be appointed by President
Content: The Ministers of the Union shall be appointed by the President and shall hold office during his pleasure:

Provided that the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President with the consent of the majority of the members of the House of the People.

Article 77
Title: Ministers to be sworn before President
Content: Every Minister shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe before the President or some person appointed by him in that behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out in the Third Schedule.

Article 78
Title: Ministers to be collectively responsible to the House of the People
Content: The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People.

Article 79
Title: Ministers to hold office during pleasure of President
Content: The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President:

Provided that, if the Prime Minister ceases to be a member of either House of Parliament, he shall cease to hold office as Prime Minister.

Article 80
Title: Council of Ministers to aid and advise President
Content: The Council of Ministers shall aid and advise the President in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is by or under this Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion.

Article 81
Title: Vacancies in Council of Ministers
Content: A member of the Council of Ministers who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a member of the Council of Ministers.

Article 82
Title: Ministers not to hold certain offices
Content: A Minister shall not hold any other office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State without the consent of the President.

Article 83
Title: Ministers to be paid salaries and allowances
Content: The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as Parliament may from time to time by law determine.

Article 84
Title: Qualifications for appointment of Ministers
Content: A person shall not be qualified to be a Minister unless he is—

(a) a citizen of India;

(b) a member of either House of Parliament; and

(c) qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the House of the People.

Article 85
Title: Ministers to be Members of Parliament
Content: (1) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.

(2) If a Minister resigns his seat in a House of Parliament, the Prime Minister shall, within a period of six weeks from the date on which the resignation is tendered, advise the President to terminate the Minister's appointment.

Article 86
Title: Oath or affirmation by Prime Minister and other Ministers
Content: Every Prime Minister and every other Minister shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed by him in that behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out in the Third Schedule.

Article 87
Title: Ministers to be collectively responsible to the House of the People
Content: The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People.

Article 88
Title: Ministers not to hold office for more than six months if Lok Sabha is dissolved
Content: A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister:

Provided that, if the Lok Sabha is dissolved within those six months, he shall not be deemed to have ceased to be a Minister during the period of the dissolution.

Article 89
Title: Ministers to hold office during the pleasure of President
Content: The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.

Article 90
Title: Ministers not to hold office for more than six months unless they are elected or nominated to either House of Parliament
Content: A Minister who is not a member of either House of Parliament shall be deemed to have vacated his office as a Minister if he continues to be so for a period exceeding six consecutive months:

Provided that, if he is elected to either House of Parliament within those six months, he shall not be deemed to have vacated his office during the period he continues to be a member of that House.

Article 91
Title: Allocation of portfolios to Ministers
Content: The Prime Minister shall be the Head of the Council of Ministers.

He shall have the right to allocate portfolios to Ministers and to determine their powers and duties.

Article 92
Title: Ministers to be Members of the Rajya Sabha
Content: Not more than twelve Ministers, other than the Prime Minister, shall be members of the Lok Sabha.

The remaining Ministers shall be members of the Rajya Sabha or shall be nominated by the President to the Rajya Sabha.

Article 93
Title: Ministers to be sworn before President
Content: Every Minister shall, before entering upon his office, take and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed by him in that behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out in the Third Schedule.

Article 94
Title: Ministers to be responsible to Parliament
Content: The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People.

Article 95
Title: Ministers to attend Parliament
Content: Every Minister shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, either House of Parliament, and to vote thereon, but shall not, by virtue of his office, be entitled to vote in the election of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.

Article 96
Title: Ministers not to hold certain offices
Content: A Minister shall not hold any other office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State, without the consent of the President.

Article 97
Title: Ministers to be disqualified on certain grounds
Content: A Minister shall be disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament if he is a member of any other House of the Legislature of any State specified in the First Schedule, or if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State, other than an office declared by the Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder.

Article 98
Title: Vacation of seats by Ministers
Content: A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.

Article 99
Title: Ministers to be entitled to be present and to speak in either House of Parliament
Content: A Minister who for the time being is not a member of either House of Parliament shall be entitled to attend and speak in either House of Parliament, but shall not be entitled to vote.

Article 100
Title: Ministers to be Members of the House of the People
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 75, the Prime Minister shall be a member of the House of the People.

The other Ministers shall be chosen from amongst the members of either House of Parliament or the Rajya Sabha.

Article 101
Title: Ministers to hold office during the pleasure of the President
Content: The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.

Article 102
Title: Ministers to be sworn in by the President
Content: Every Minister shall, before entering upon his office, take and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed by him in that behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out in the Third Schedule.

Article 103
Title: Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members
Content: Article 103 of the Constitution of India establishes that any question concerning the disqualification of a member of either House of Parliament shall be referred to the President for decision. The President's decision on such matters is final and cannot be challenged in any court.

Article 104
Title: Salaries and allowances of Ministers
Content: The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be determined by Parliament by law.

Article 105
Title: Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the members and committees thereof
Content: Article 105 of the Constitution of India deals with the powers, privileges, and immunities of the Houses of Parliament, their members, and their committees.

Article 106
Title: Provisions as to the President's assent
Content: Article 106 of the Constitution of India deals with the President's assent to bills passed by the Parliament.

Article 107
Title: Procedures in Parliament with respect to money bills
Content: Article 107 of the Constitution of India outlines the special procedures that are followed in Parliament in relation to money bills.

Article 108
Title: Joint sitting of both Houses of Parliament
Content: Article 108 of the Constitution of India pertains to the joint sitting of both Houses of Parliament in certain situations.

Article 109
Title: Special provisions as to financial bills
Content: Article 109 of the Constitution of India deals with the special provisions related to financial bills and their passage in the Parliament.

Article 110
Title: Definition of Money Bills
Content: Article 110 of the Constitution of India defines the term 'Money Bills' and outlines the procedures for their introduction, passage, and consideration in the Parliament.

Article 111
Title: Assent to Bills
Content: Article 111 of the Constitution of India deals with the process of granting assent to bills passed by both Houses of Parliament.

Article 112
Title: Annual Financial Statement
Content: Article 112 of the Constitution of India deals with the presentation of the Annual Financial Statement, commonly known as the Budget, in the Parliament.

Article 113
Title: Procedure in Financial Matters
Content: Article 113 of the Constitution of India outlines the procedure for annual financial matters, including the voting of demands for grants.

Article 114
Title: Appropriation Bills
Content: Article 114 of the Constitution of India deals with the enactment and passage of Appropriation Bills in the Parliament.

Article 115
Title: Estimates
Content: Article 115 of the Constitution of India pertains to the procedure for the presentation and consideration of estimates in the Parliament.

Article 116
Title: Votes on Account, Votes of Credit and Exceptional Grants
Content: Article 116 of the Constitution of India deals with the procedure for obtaining votes on account, votes of credit, and exceptional grants in the Parliament.

Article 117
Title: Special Procedure in respect of Money Bills
Content: Article 117 of the Constitution of India outlines the special procedure to be followed for the passing of Money Bills in the Parliament.

Article 118
Title: Rules of Procedure
Content: Article 118 of the Constitution of India empowers each House of Parliament to make its own rules and conduct its proceedings independently.

Article 119
Title: Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to financial business
Content: Article 119 of the Constitution of India mandates that Parliament may make laws to regulate the procedure of both Houses in relation to financial matters, including the annual budget.

Article 120
Title: Language to be used in Parliament
Content: Article 120 of the Constitution of India stipulates that the business of Parliament shall be conducted in either Hindi or English, as chosen by members. Members not proficient in either language may seek translation assistance.

Article 121
Title: Restrictions on discussion in Parliament
Content: Article 121 of the Constitution of India places restrictions on discussions in Parliament regarding conduct of judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts during the process of discharging their duties.

Article 122
Title: Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament
Content: Article 122 of the Constitution of India bars any court from inquiring into the validity of proceedings in Parliament on the grounds of irregularities or procedural defects.

Article 123
Title: Power of the President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament
Content: Article 123 of the Constitution of India grants the President the authority to promulgate Ordinances when both Houses of Parliament are not in session. An Ordinance has the same force and effect as a law passed by Parliament.

Article 124
Title: Establishment and Constitution of the Supreme Court
Content: Article 124 of the Constitution of India establishes the Supreme Court as the highest judicial authority in the country. It consists of a Chief Justice of India and other judges, the number of which is determined by Parliament.

Article 125
Title: Salaries and Allowances of Judges
Content: Article 125 of the Constitution of India deals with the salaries and allowances of judges in the Supreme Court. The salaries of judges are determined by Parliament and are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.

Article 126
Title: Appointment of Acting Chief Justice
Content: Article 126 of the Constitution of India deals with the appointment of an acting Chief Justice of India when the office of the Chief Justice is vacant or when the Chief Justice is absent or unable to perform the duties of the office.

Article 127
Title: Appointment of Ad Hoc Judges
Content: Article 127 of the Constitution of India provides for the appointment of ad hoc judges in the Supreme Court. Ad hoc judges are appointed to assist the Supreme Court in the disposal of cases in situations where a sitting judge is unable to participate in a particular case due to absence or disqualification.

Article 128
Title: Attendance of retired judges at sittings of the Supreme Court
Content: Article 128 of the Constitution of India deals with the attendance of retired judges at sittings of the Supreme Court. This article allows the Chief Justice of India to invite retired judges who have previously served in the Supreme Court to participate in its proceedings.

Article 129
Title: Supreme Court to be a court of record
Content: Article 129 of the Constitution of India designates the Supreme Court as a 'court of record.' This provision grants the Supreme Court the authority to maintain an accurate and authoritative record of its own proceedings, decisions, and judgments.

Article 130
Title: Seat of the Supreme Court
Content: Article 130 of the Constitution of India specifies the seat of the Supreme Court. It states that the Supreme Court shall sit in the capital of India, which is New Delhi.

Article 131
Title: Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
Content: Article 131 of the Constitution of India confers upon the Supreme Court the original jurisdiction to hear disputes between the Government of India and one or more States, or disputes between States.

Article 132
Title: Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts
Content: Article 132 of the Constitution of India grants the Supreme Court the appellate jurisdiction to hear appeals from any judgment, decree, or final order of a High Court, whether in a civil, criminal, or other proceeding, if the High Court certifies that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution.

Article 133
Title: Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in certain cases
Content: Article 133 of the Constitution of India grants the Supreme Court the appellate jurisdiction to hear appeals from any judgment, decree, or final order of a High Court if the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance and if the High Court certifies that the case is fit for appeal to the Supreme Court.

Article 134
Title: Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters
Content: Article 134 of the Constitution of India grants the Supreme Court the appellate jurisdiction to hear appeals from judgments, final orders, or sentences of High Courts in criminal cases. The cases can be heard if the High Court certifies that the case involves a substantial question of law or interpretation of the Constitution, and if the Supreme Court grants special leave to appeal.

Article 134A
Title: Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court
Content: Article 134A of the Constitution of India deals with the provision for a certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court. It specifies that an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order, or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court if the High Court certifies that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution or the interpretation of a statute.

Article 135
Title: Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law to be exercisable by the Supreme Court
Content: Article 135 of the Constitution of India stipulates that the jurisdiction and powers that were previously exercisable by the Federal Court of India under existing law would now be vested in the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court would continue to exercise the same jurisdiction, powers, and authority that the Federal Court had before the adoption of the Constitution.

Article 136
Title: Special Leave to Appeal by the Supreme Court
Content: Article 136 of the Constitution of India grants the Supreme Court the discretionary power to grant special leave to appeal in any matter, civil or criminal. This means that if a person or a party is dissatisfied with a decision of any court or tribunal in India, they can approach the Supreme Court seeking permission to appeal, even if there is no inherent right to appeal. The Supreme Court can choose to either allow or dismiss the appeal, based on the merits of the case.

Article 137
Title: Review and Curative Petitions in the Supreme Court
Content: Article 137 of the Constitution of India empowers the Supreme Court to review its own judgments, orders, or decrees. It allows any person, aggrieved by a decision of the Supreme Court, to file a petition seeking a review of the judgment on specified grounds. The review petition is generally heard by a larger bench of the Supreme Court than the one that rendered the original decision.

Article 138
Title: Enlargement of the Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
Content: Article 138 of the Constitution of India empowers the Parliament to increase the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. It provides that the Parliament, by law, may confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to hear and decide appeals from any judgment, decree, or order in any civil, criminal, or other matter, passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of India.

Article 139
Title: Conferment of Advisory Jurisdiction on the Supreme Court
Content: Article 139 of the Constitution of India deals with the conferment of advisory jurisdiction on the Supreme Court. According to this article, the President of India may, at any time, seek the Supreme Court's opinion on questions of public importance or questions of law which have arisen or are likely to arise.

Article 139A
Title: Transfer of certain cases
Content: Article 139A of the Constitution of India deals with the transfer of certain cases from one High Court to another. It specifies that if the President of India, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, is satisfied that it is necessary to do so for ensuring a fair trial, he may transfer any case, appeal, or other proceedings from one High Court to another High Court.

Article 140
Title: Anglo-Indian Community Representation in Legislative Assemblies
Content: Article 140 of the Constitution of India deals with the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the legislative assemblies of states. This article provides for the nomination of members from the Anglo-Indian community to the legislative assemblies of states, ensuring their participation in the democratic process.

Article 141
Title: Law Declared by Supreme Court to be Binding on All Courts
Content: Article 141 of the Constitution of India establishes the principle that the law declared by the Supreme Court of India is binding on all courts within the territory of India. This article ensures the supremacy of the Supreme Court's decisions and interpretations of the law.

Article 142
Title: Enforcement of Decrees and Orders of Supreme Court and Orders as to Discovery
Content: Article 142 of the Constitution of India empowers the Supreme Court to issue orders and decrees that are necessary for doing complete justice in any case or matter pending before it, or to prevent the abuse of its process. This article grants the Supreme Court wide discretionary powers to ensure fairness, justice, and equity in its decisions.

Article 143
Title: Reference to the Supreme Court by the President
Content: Article 143 of the Constitution of India empowers the President to seek the advisory opinion of the Supreme Court on any question of law or fact that is of public importance and has arisen or is likely to arise. This provision allows the President to obtain the Court's guidance on complex legal or constitutional matters.

Article 144
Title: Civil and Judicial Authorities to Act in Aid of the Supreme Court
Content: Article 144 of the Constitution of India mandates that all civil and judicial authorities in the country are bound to act in aid of the Supreme Court. This provision emphasizes the authority and supremacy of the Supreme Court as the highest judicial institution in India.

Article 145
Title: Rules of Court, etc.
Content: Article 145 of the Constitution of India empowers the Supreme Court to frame its own rules for regulating its practices and procedures. It grants the Court the authority to establish rules for the conduct of its business, the presentation of appeals, and other matters pertaining to its functioning.

Article 146
Title: Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court
Content: Article 146 of the Constitution of India deals with the appointment of officers and servants of the Supreme Court. It empowers the Chief Justice of India to determine the number of officers and employees required for the efficient functioning of the Supreme Court. The administrative expenses of the Supreme Court are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.

Article 147
Title: Interpretation
Content: Article 147 of the Constitution of India deals with the interpretation of the provisions of the Constitution. It empowers the President to establish an authoritative text of the Constitution in Hindi and English languages, and such text shall be the authoritative text for interpretation purposes.

Article 148
Title: Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
Content: Article 148 of the Constitution of India establishes the Comptroller and Auditor-General (CAG) of India. The CAG is an independent constitutional authority responsible for auditing the accounts of the Union and State governments, as well as other entities receiving government funds.

Article 149
Title: Duties and Powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General
Content: Article 149 of the Constitution of India outlines the duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General (CAG) of India. The CAG is responsible for auditing the accounts of the Union and State governments, as well as other entities receiving government funds.

Article 150
Title: Audit Reports and Accounts of the States
Content: Article 150 of the Constitution of India deals with the audit of accounts of the States by the Comptroller and Auditor-General (CAG) of India. The CAG is responsible for auditing the accounts of the States to ensure financial transparency and accountability.

Article 151
Title: Audit Reports and Accounts of the Union and States
Content: Article 151 of the Constitution of India establishes the role of the Comptroller and Auditor-General (CAG) in conducting audits of the accounts of both the Union and the States. The CAG ensures transparency, accountability, and responsible use of public funds.

Article 152
Title: General Provisions as to Governors
Content: Article 152 of the Constitution of India outlines the provisions related to the Governor of a State. The Governor is the constitutional head of the State and acts as a representative of the President at the state level.

Article 153
Title: Governors of States
Content: Article 153 of the Constitution of India deals with the appointment of Governors for different States. It empowers the President to appoint Governors for each State, acting as the constitutional head of the State.

Article 154
Title: Executive Power of the State
Content: Article 154 of the Constitution of India confers the executive power of a State on the Governor. The Governor is responsible for the execution of laws, maintenance of law and order, and overall governance within the State.

Article 155
Title: Appointment of Governor
Content: Article 155 of the Constitution of India deals with the appointment of Governors for States. The Governor is appointed by the President of India and holds office at the pleasure of the President.

Article 156
Title: Term of Office of Governor
Content: Article 156 of the Constitution of India outlines the term of office of a Governor. The Governor holds office for a term of five years from the date they enter upon their office.

Article 157
Title: Qualifications for Appointment as Governor
Content: Article 157 of the Constitution of India specifies the qualifications required for an individual to be appointed as the Governor of a State. A person must be a citizen of India and should have completed the age of thirty-five years.

Article 158
Title: Conditions of Governor's Office
Content: Article 158 of the Constitution of India outlines the conditions under which the office of the Governor of a State operates. The Governor's emoluments and allowances are determined by the President of India.

Article 159
Title: Oath or Affirmation by the Governor
Content: Article 159 of the Constitution of India outlines the oath or affirmation that the Governor of a State takes before entering upon their office. The Governor swears or affirms allegiance to the Constitution of India and promises to discharge their duties faithfully.

Article 160
Title: Oath or Affirmation by Ministers
Content: Article 160 of the Constitution of India pertains to the oath or affirmation that Ministers of a State take before entering upon their office. The Ministers swear or affirm allegiance to the Constitution of India and promise to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of the country.

Article 161
Title: Power of Governor to Grant Pardons
Content: Article 161 of the Constitution of India empowers the Governor of a State to grant pardons, reprieves, respites, or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offense against a law related to matters under the authority of the State Government.

Article 162
Title: Extent of Executive Power of State
Content: Article 162 of the Constitution of India deals with the extent of the executive power of the State Government. It stipulates that the executive power of a State shall extend to all matters on which the State Legislature can make laws, except for matters vested exclusively in the Union Government by the Constitution.

Article 163
Title: Council of Ministers to Aid and Advise Governor
Content: Article 163 of the Constitution of India pertains to the Council of Ministers and their role in advising the Governor. It outlines that there shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister as the head, to aid and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions, except in cases where the Governor is required by the Constitution to act without the advice of the Council of Ministers.

Article 164
Title: Other Provisions as to Ministers
Content: Article 164 of the Constitution of India deals with the appointment and composition of the Council of Ministers in states. It specifies that the Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor, and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister. The total number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister, must not exceed 15% of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly of the state.

Article 165
Title: Advocate General for the State
Content: Article 165 of the Constitution of India deals with the appointment and functions of the Advocate General for the State. The Governor appoints an Advocate General for each state who acts as the chief legal advisor to the state government and provides legal advice on various matters. The Advocate General has the right to speak and participate in the proceedings of the state legislative assembly or council, but he/she cannot vote.

Article 166
Title: Conduct of Government Business
Content: Article 166 of the Constitution of India deals with the conduct of government business in the state. It states that the executive power of the state shall be vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him/her either directly or through officers subordinate to him/her, as per the provisions of the Constitution or laws made by the state legislature.

Article 167
Title: Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to Governor, etc.
Content: Article 167 of the Constitution of India outlines the duties of the Chief Minister of a state regarding the furnishing of information to the Governor. The Chief Minister is responsible for communicating to the Governor information related to the administration of the state and proposals for legislation. The Governor can request information about any matter relating to the state's administration, and the Chief Minister is obligated to provide such information.

Article 168
Title: Sessions of the State Legislature, Prorogation and Dissolution
Content: Article 168 of the Constitution of India deals with the sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation, and dissolution. It states that the Governor shall summon the State Legislature to meet at least twice a year, and there should not be a gap of more than six months between its sessions. The Governor has the authority to prorogue the House or Houses of the Legislature, and the Chief Minister can request the Governor to dissolve the Legislative Assembly.

Article 169
Title: Abolition or Creation of Legislative Councils in States
Content: Article 169 of the Constitution of India deals with the power to abolish or create Legislative Councils in States. It provides that Parliament may by law abolish the Legislative Council in a State having such a Council or create one in a State that does not have it. However, this can only be done if the Legislative Assembly of the concerned State passes a resolution requesting the same by a special majority.

Article 170
Title: Composition of Legislative Assemblies
Content: Article 170 of the Constitution of India deals with the composition of the Legislative Assemblies of States. It specifies the maximum and minimum number of members in the Legislative Assembly of each State. The maximum number of members cannot exceed 500, while the minimum number cannot be less than 60.

Article 171
Title: Composition of Legislative Councils
Content: Article 171 of the Constitution of India pertains to the composition of the Legislative Councils in States with bicameral legislatures. It outlines the maximum and minimum number of members in the Legislative Council of each State. The maximum number of members cannot exceed one-third of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly, while the minimum number cannot be less than 40.

Article 172
Title: Duration of State Legislative Assemblies
Content: Article 172 of the Constitution of India deals with the duration of State Legislative Assemblies. It specifies that the maximum term of a Legislative Assembly is five years from the date of its first meeting. However, this term can be shortened by the dissolution of the Assembly by the Governor or due to the imposition of President's Rule in the State.

Article 173
Title: Qualification for Membership of the State Legislature
Content: Article 173 of the Constitution of India specifies the qualifications that a person must possess to become a member of a State Legislature. According to this article, a person must be a citizen of India, must have attained the age of 25 years for the Legislative Assembly and 30 years for the Legislative Council, and should not be disqualified under any law made by Parliament.

Article 174
Title: Sessions of the State Legislature, Prorogation and Dissolution
Content: Article 174 of the Constitution of India deals with the sessions, prorogation, and dissolution of the State Legislature. According to this article, the Governor of a State summons the State Legislature to meet from time to time. There should not be a gap of more than six months between two sessions. The Governor can prorogue the Legislature and dissolve the Legislative Assembly, but the maximum gap between the last session and the first sitting of the next session should not exceed six months.

Article 175
Title: Right of Governor to Address and Send Messages to the House or Houses
Content: Article 175 of the Constitution of India grants the Governor the right to address and send messages to the State Legislature. The Governor can address either House of the Legislature or both Houses assembled together. This provision allows the Governor to communicate important matters, policies, and recommendations to the State Legislature.

Article 176
Title: Sessions of the State Legislature, Prorogation and Dissolution
Content: Article 176 of the Constitution of India deals with the sessions, prorogation, and dissolution of the State Legislature. It mandates that the Governor shall summon each House of the State Legislature to meet at least twice a year. The interval between two sessions shall not exceed six months.

Article 177
Title: Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the Houses
Content: Article 177 of the Constitution of India pertains to the rights of Ministers and the Advocate-General in relation to the State Legislature. It grants the right to Ministers to speak and participate in the proceedings of both Houses of the State Legislature. Similarly, the Advocate-General has the right to address and participate in the proceedings of the State Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly.

Article 178
Title: Sessions of the State Legislature, Prorogation and Dissolution
Content: Article 178 of the Constitution of India deals with the sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation, and dissolution. It specifies that the Governor of a State, in consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, summons and prorogues the sessions of the Legislative Assembly. The Governor also has the authority to dissolve the Legislative Assembly, which leads to the initiation of general elections in the state.

Article 179
Title: Sessions of Parliament, Prorogation and Dissolution
Content: Article 179 of the Constitution of India deals with the sessions of Parliament, prorogation, and dissolution. It specifies that the President of India, in consultation with the Speaker of the Lok Sabha (House of the People) and the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha (Council of States), summons and prorogues the sessions of both Houses of Parliament. The President also has the authority to dissolve the Lok Sabha, which leads to the initiation of general elections for the House.

Article 180
Title: Assumption of Functions of the State by the Governor
Content: Article 180 of the Constitution of India deals with the assumption of functions of the state by the Governor. It specifies that in the event of the failure of constitutional machinery in a state, the Governor can assume to himself all or any of the functions of the state government. The Governor can take such actions in the name of the President, and it essentially allows for the direct intervention of the central government in the state's affairs to restore constitutional order.

Article 181
Title: Assumption of Functions of the Chief Minister
Content: Article 181 of the Constitution of India pertains to the assumption of functions of the Chief Minister by the Governor. It specifies that if the Governor is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the government of the state cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, the Governor can, by Proclamation, assume to himself all or any of the functions of the Chief Minister. This essentially allows the Governor to take over the executive powers of the Chief Minister under extraordinary circumstances.

Article 182
Title: Form of Oath or Affirmation by Members
Content: Article 182 of the Constitution of India deals with the form of oath or affirmation that Members of the State Legislature are required to take before they start their duties. It specifies that every member shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation as set out in the Third Schedule of the Constitution. The oath or affirmation is a solemn commitment to uphold the Constitution and to faithfully discharge the duties of the office.

Article 183
Title: Members of Legislative Assemblies, Privileges
Content: Article 183 of the Constitution of India deals with the privileges of members of the Legislative Assemblies of States. It specifies that the powers, privileges, and immunities of members of a State Legislative Assembly shall be as provided by the relevant legislation of the State, and until then, as those of the members of the House of the People.

Article 184
Title: Sessions of the Houses of Parliament, Prorogation, and Dissolution
Content: Article 184 of the Constitution of India deals with the sessions of the Houses of Parliament, prorogation, and dissolution. It specifies that the President, in the case of the two Houses of Parliament, can summon, prorogue, and dissolve them. The President has the authority to dissolve the House of the People (Lok Sabha), which leads to the initiation of general elections throughout the country.

Article 185
Title: Decision on Questions as to Disqualifications of Members
Content: Article 185 of the Constitution of India pertains to the decision on questions regarding the disqualifications of members of either House of Parliament. It specifies that any question regarding the disqualification of a member of either House shall be referred to the President, and the President's decision in such matters shall be final.

Article 186
Title: Salaries and Allowances of Members
Content: Article 186 of the Constitution of India deals with the salaries and allowances of Members of Parliament. It states that Parliament may, by law, determine the salaries and allowances payable to members, taking into account factors such as the responsibilities of the office and prevailing economic conditions.

Article 187
Title: Decision on Questions as to Disqualifications of Members
Content: Article 187 of the Constitution of India pertains to the decision on questions regarding the disqualifications of members of the Legislative Assemblies of States. It states that any question regarding the disqualification of a member shall be referred to the Governor, and the Governor's decision in such matters shall be final.

Article 188
Title: Oath or Affirmation by Members
Content: Article 188 of the Constitution of India deals with the oath or affirmation that Members of the State Legislature are required to take before they start their duties. It specifies that every member shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation as set out in the Third Schedule of the Constitution. The oath or affirmation is a solemn commitment to uphold the Constitution and to faithfully discharge the duties of the office.

Article 189
Title: Vacation of Seats
Content: Article 189 of the Constitution of India deals with the vacation of seats of Members of the State Legislature. It specifies that a member of a State Legislature will vacate their seat if they become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in Article 191. Such disqualifications include holding an office of profit, unsoundness of mind, being an undischarged insolvent, and ceasing to be a citizen of India.

Article 190
Title: Vacation of Seats
Content: Article 190 of the Constitution of India deals with the vacation of seats of Members of the State Legislature who are elected to both Houses of Parliament or to the Legislative Assembly of another State. It specifies that a member of the State Legislature will vacate their seat if they are elected to another house mentioned above, and a period of fourteen days has elapsed from the date of their election.

Article 191
Title: Disqualifications for Membership
Content: Article 191 of the Constitution of India pertains to the disqualifications for membership in the State Legislature. It specifies various grounds on which a person can be disqualified from being chosen as, and for being, a member of the State Legislature. These disqualifications include holding an office of profit, being of unsound mind, being an undischarged insolvent, not being a citizen of India, and other reasons.

Article 192
Title: Decision on Questions as to Disqualifications of Members
Content: Article 192 of the Constitution of India deals with the decision on questions regarding the disqualifications of members of the State Legislature. It specifies that any question regarding the disqualification of a member shall be referred to the Governor, and the Governor's decision in such matters shall be final.

Article 193
Title: Penalty for Sitting and Voting Before Making Oath or Affirmation Under Article 188
Content: Article 193 of the Constitution of India deals with the penalty for members of the State Legislature who sit and vote before making the oath or affirmation as required under Article 188. It specifies that any member who does so shall be subject to a penalty of forfeiting their seat and shall also be disqualified from the membership until they make the oath or affirmation.

Article 194
Title: Powers, Privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of the Members and Committees Thereof
Content: Article 194 of the Constitution of India deals with the powers, privileges, and immunities of the State Legislature and its members and committees. It specifies that the powers, privileges, and immunities of a State Legislature, and of the members and committees thereof, shall be those of the House of the People (Lok Sabha) and its members and committees. However, the State Legislature can define these powers, privileges, and immunities through legislation.

Article 195
Title: Salaries and Allowances of Members
Content: Article 195 of the Constitution of India deals with the salaries and allowances of Members of the State Legislature. It states that the salaries and allowances of members shall be determined by the State Legislature, and until the Legislature makes provisions in this regard, they shall be as specified in the Second Schedule of the Constitution.

Article 196
Title: Secretary of the Legislature
Content: Article 196 of the Constitution of India deals with the appointment of a Secretary to the State Legislature. It specifies that the Governor shall appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed as the Secretary of the Legislative Assembly. The Secretary assists the Speaker in performing their duties and is responsible for the administration of the Legislature.

Article 197
Title: Secretariat of the Legislature
Content: Article 197 of the Constitution of India deals with the establishment of a Secretariat for the State Legislature. It specifies that there shall be a separate Secretariat for each House of the State Legislature, and the Governor shall appoint a Secretary for each House to manage its affairs.

Article 198
Title: Sessions of the State Legislature, Prorogation and Dissolution
Content: Article 198 of the Constitution of India deals with the sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation, and dissolution. It specifies that the Governor of a State, in consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Council, summons and prorogues the sessions of the Legislative Council. The Governor also has the authority to dissolve the Legislative Council, which leads to the initiation of general elections for the council.

Article 199
Title: Vacation of Seats
Content: Article 199 of the Constitution of India deals with the vacation of seats of Members of the State Legislative Council. It specifies that a member of the Legislative Council will vacate their seat if they become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in Article 191. Such disqualifications include holding an office of profit, unsoundness of mind, being an undischarged insolvent, and ceasing to be a citizen of India.

Article 200
Title: Assent to Bills
Content: Article 200 of the Constitution of India deals with the assent to bills passed by the State Legislature. It specifies that when a bill is passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State, the Governor can either give their assent to the bill, withhold their assent, or return the bill (if it's not a money bill) for reconsideration. If the bill is reconsidered and passed again, the Governor must give their assent.

Article 201
Title: Bill Reserved for Consideration
Content: Article 201 of the Constitution of India deals with bills reserved by the Governor for the consideration of the President. It specifies that if a bill passed by a State Legislature is reserved by the Governor for the President's consideration, the President can either give their assent, withhold their assent, or direct the Governor to return the bill (if it's not a money bill) for reconsideration. If the bill is reconsidered and passed again, the President may give their assent.

Article 202
Title: Annual Financial Statement
Content: Article 202 of the Constitution of India deals with the Annual Financial Statement of the State. It specifies that the Governor shall in respect of every financial year, cause to be laid before the State Legislature, a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the State for that year, referred to as the Annual Financial Statement. This statement includes both revenue and capital expenditure.

Article 203
Title: Procedure in Financial Matters
Content: Article 203 of the Constitution of India deals with the procedure to be followed in financial matters in the State Legislature. It specifies that bills or amendments involving expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State can only be introduced in the State Legislature with the prior recommendation of the Governor. No discussion on such bills can take place except on the recommendation of the Governor.

Article 204
Title: Taxation at the State and Local Levels
Content: Article 204 of the Constitution of India deals with the taxation powers of the State and local authorities. It specifies that taxes on professions, trades, callings, and employments within a State or local area can be levied and collected by that State or local authority, subject to the provisions of the Constitution. However, the Parliament has the authority to regulate the manner in which such taxes are assessed and collected.

Article 205
Title: Formulation of Plans
Content: Article 205 of the Constitution of India deals with the formulation of plans for development. It specifies that the Governor of a State shall, after the appropriation bill has been enacted, lay before the State Legislature the annual financial statement detailing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the State for the financial year. This statement also includes the proposed expenditures on development plans.

Article 206
Title: Power of State to Borrow
Content: Article 206 of the Constitution of India deals with the power of the State to borrow. It specifies that the State Government can borrow funds, subject to the provisions of this article and the law made by the State Legislature. However, the State Government cannot borrow without the prior consent of the President if the borrowings include any liability that is charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State.

Article 207
Title: Special Responsibility of the Governor
Content: Article 207 of the Constitution of India deals with the special responsibility of the Governor with respect to the annual financial statement. It specifies that the Governor shall in respect of every financial year, cause to be laid before both Houses of the State Legislature the annual financial statement. The statement includes the estimated receipts and expenditure of the State for that year, referred to as the budget.

Article 208
Title: Duty of the Chief Minister as to the Furnishing of Information to the Governor
Content: Article 208 of the Constitution of India deals with the duty of the Chief Minister to furnish information to the Governor. It specifies that it shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of each State to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the State and proposals for legislation as the Governor may require.

Article 209
Title: Oath or Affirmation by the Governor
Content: Article 209 of the Constitution of India deals with the oath or affirmation taken by the Governor. It specifies that before entering upon the office, the Governor shall make and subscribe an oath or affirmation in the presence of the Chief Justice of the High Court in the state. This oath or affirmation binds the Governor to faithfully execute the office and discharge the duties in accordance with the Constitution.

Article 210
Title: Member's Oath or Affirmation
Content: Article 210 of the Constitution of India deals with the oath or affirmation taken by Members of the State Legislature. It specifies that every member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council shall, before taking their seat, make and subscribe an oath or affirmation in the form set out in the Third Schedule of the Constitution.

Article 211
Title: Conduct of Business of the Legislature of a State
Content: Article 211 of the Constitution of India deals with the conduct of business in the Legislature of a State. It specifies that the Governor of the State shall, from time to time, summon the House or each House of the Legislature to meet at such time and place as they think fit. The Governor also has the authority to prorogue the Houses and dissolve the Legislative Assembly.

Article 212
Title: Power of Governor to address and send messages to the House or Houses
Content: Article 212 of the Constitution of India deals with the power of the Governor to address and send messages to the House or Houses of the State Legislature. It specifies that the Governor may address the House or either House of the Legislature of the State, and for that purpose, may require the attendance of members. The Governor also has the right to send messages to the House or Houses, whether with respect to a bill then pending or otherwise.

Article 213
Title: Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature
Content: Article 213 of the Constitution of India deals with the power of the Governor to promulgate ordinances during the recess of the Legislature. It specifies that the Governor has the authority to promulgate ordinances when the Legislature of the State is not in session if circumstances require immediate action. These ordinances have the same force and effect as laws made by the Legislature.

Article 214
Title: High Courts for States
Content: Article 214 of the Constitution of India deals with the establishment of High Courts for States. It specifies that there shall be a High Court for each State, which is a court of record and has the power to issue writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto, and certiorari for the enforcement of fundamental rights and other legal rights.

Article 215
Title: High Courts to be courts of record
Content: Article 215 of the Constitution of India deals with High Courts being courts of record. It specifies that every High Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court, including the power to punish for contempt of itself.

Article 216
Title: Constitution of High Courts
Content: Article 216 of the Constitution of India deals with the constitution of High Courts. It specifies that every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other Judges as the President may from time to time deem it necessary to appoint. The number of Judges in a High Court can be determined by the President, depending on the needs of the judiciary.

Article 217
Title: Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High Court
Content: Article 217 of the Constitution of India deals with the appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High Court. It specifies that a Judge of a High Court is appointed by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the Governor of the respective state. The Judge holds office until the age of 62, subject to their resignation or removal as per the procedure prescribed in the Constitution.

Article 218
Title: Application of the provisions relating to the Supreme Court to the High Courts
Content: Article 218 of the Constitution of India deals with the application of provisions related to the Supreme Court to the High Courts. It specifies that the provisions of Chapter IV (dealing with the Supreme Court) shall apply in relation to High Courts as they apply in relation to the Supreme Court, with certain modifications.

Article 219
Title: Oath or affirmation by Judges of High Courts
Content: Article 219 of the Constitution of India deals with the oath or affirmation taken by Judges of High Courts. It specifies that every person appointed as a Judge of a High Court shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe an oath or affirmation in the prescribed manner, swearing allegiance to the Constitution and to faithfully perform the duties of his office.

Article 220
Title: Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge
Content: Article 220 of the Constitution of India deals with the restriction on practice by a person who has been a permanent Judge of a High Court. It specifies that a person who has held the office of a permanent Judge shall not plead or act in any court or before any authority in India except the Supreme Court, after they cease to hold that office.

Article 221
Title: Salaries, etc., of Judges
Content: Until the Parliament by law otherwise provides, a Judge of a High Court shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances and to such conditions of service as are admissible to a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Article 222
Title: Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another
Content: The President may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, transfer a Judge from one High Court to any other High Court.

Article 223
Title: Appointment of acting Chief Justice
Content: If the office of the Chief Justice of a High Court is vacant or if the Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as the President may appoint for the purpose.

Article 224
Title: Appointment of additional and acting Judges
Content: If by reason of any temporary increase in the business of a High Court or by reason of arrears of work therein, it appears to the President that the number of the Judges of that Court should be for the time being increased, the President may appoint duly qualified persons to be additional Judges of the Court for such period not exceeding two years as the President may specify.

Article 224A
Title: Appointment of ad hoc judges
Content: If by reason of any temporary increase in the business of a High Court or by reason of arrears of work therein, it appears to the President that the number of the judges of that Court should be for the time being increased, the President may appoint duly qualified persons to be ad hoc judges of the Court for such period not exceeding two years as may be specified in the instrument of appointment.

Article 225
Title: Jurisdiction of existing High Courts
Content: Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the provisions of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature by this Constitution, the jurisdiction of, and the law administered in, any existing High Court, and the respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the administration of justice in the Court, including any power to make rules of Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members thereof sitting alone or in Division Courts, shall be the same as immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.

Article 226
Title: Power of High Courts to issue certain writs
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 32, every High Court shall have powers, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories directions, orders, or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto, and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.

Article 226A
Title: Validation of certain Acts and Regulations
Content: Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority, no Act or Regulation of a Legislature shall be deemed to be invalid merely on the ground that it encroaches or may encroach upon the matters within the competence of another Legislature.

Article 227
Title: Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court
Content: Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, except any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the armed forces.

Article 228
Title: Transfer of certain cases to High Court
Content: If the High Court is satisfied that a case pending in a court subordinate to it involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution, the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case, it shall withdraw the case and may—
(a) either dispose of the case itself, or
(b) determine the said question of law and return the case to the court from which the case has been so withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such question:

Article 228A
Title: Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to constitutional validity of State laws
Content: No High Court shall have jurisdiction to declare any central law to be constitutionally invalid.

Article 229
Title: Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts
Content: Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service of officers and servants of a High Court shall be such as may be determined by the Chief Justice of the Court.

Article 230
Title: Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union territories
Content: Parliament may by law extend the jurisdiction of a High Court to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.

Article 231
Title: Validation of certain Acts and Regulations
Content: Notwithstanding the expiration of the period of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution and the expiration of any law made by Parliament or any provision thereof, or anything done or any action taken under such law, before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, shall, in so far as such thing done or action taken is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, be deemed to have been validly done or taken under this Constitution as if this Part were in force on and from the commencement of the said Act.

Article 232
Title: Restriction on discussion in the Legislature of a State with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, in the case of the Legislature of a State, a Bill or amendment making provision for the discussion of the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties shall not be introduced or moved in the Legislature.

Article 233
Title: Appointment of district judges
Content: Appointments of persons to be, and the posting and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the Governor of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.

Article 234
Title: Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial service
Content: Appointments of persons other than district judges to the judicial service of a State shall be made by the Governor of the State in accordance with rules made by him in that behalf after consultation with the State Public Service Commission and with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.

Article 235
Title: Control over subordinate courts
Content: The control over district courts and courts subordinate thereto including the posting and promotion of, and the grant of leave to, persons belonging to the judicial service of a State and holding any post inferior to the post of district judge shall be vested in the High Court, but nothing in this article shall be construed as taking away from any such person any right of appeal which he may have under the law regulating the conditions of his service or as authorising the High Court to deal with him otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of his service prescribed under such law.

Article 236
Title: Interpretation
Content: In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, "High Court" means the highest court of a State, exercising original, appellate and advisory jurisdiction.

Article 237
Title: Application to Union territories
Content: The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of the State were references to the Administrator of the Union territory.

Article 238
Title: Special provisions as to the State of Assam
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order, make such provision as appears to him to be necessary for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Assam Accord, and thereupon such provision shall have the force of law.

Article 239
Title: Administration of Union territories
Content: Save as otherwise provided by Parliament by law, every Union territory shall be administered by the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through an administrator to be appointed by him with such designation as he may specify.

Article 239A
Title: Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or both for certain Union territories
Content: Article 239A of the Constitution of India deals with the creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or both for certain Union territories. It specifies that Parliament has the authority to create a Legislative Assembly or a Council of Ministers or both for Union territories, subject to the provisions and exceptions as specified in the Article.

Article 239B
Title: Power of Administrator to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature
Content: Article 239B of the Constitution of India deals with the power of the Administrator to promulgate ordinances during the recess of the Legislature in Union territories. It specifies that if the Administrator of a Union territory is satisfied that circumstances exist that require the immediate action, he may promulgate ordinances, similar to the authority of the Governor of a state.

Article 240
Title: Power of President to make regulations for certain Union territories
Content: The President may make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the Union territories of—

(a) Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(b) Lakshadweep;

Article 241
Title: High Courts to be courts of record
Content: Every High Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.

Article 242
Title: Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers or river valleys
Content: Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution, or control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley.

Article 243
Title: Panchayats
Content: The State shall take steps to organize village panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.

Article 243A
Title: Gram Sabha
Content: Article 243A of the Constitution of India deals with the concept of the Gram Sabha in Panchayats. It specifies that a Gram Sabha consisting of persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to a village within the Panchayat area shall be constituted in every village. The Gram Sabha has roles and functions as prescribed by the state Legislature, including making recommendations on plans and projects for social and economic development.

Article 243B
Title: Constitution of Panchayats
Content: Article 243B of the Constitution of India deals with the constitution of Panchayats at the village, intermediate, and district levels. It specifies that the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the establishment of Panchayats at these three levels, with seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and women in proportion to their population.

Article 243C
Title: Composition of Panchayats
Content: Article 243C of the Constitution of India deals with the composition of Panchayats. It specifies that a Panchayat at the village, intermediate, and district levels shall be composed of members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area. The number of seats and reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and women are determined by the state Legislature.

Article 243D
Title: Reservation of seats
Content: Article 243D of the Constitution of India deals with the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and women in Panchayats. It specifies that seats shall be reserved for these categories in proportion to their population, and such reservations shall not be less than one-third of the total seats. The offices of the chairpersons in Panchayats at all levels shall also be reserved.

Article 243E
Title: Duration of Panchayats, etc.
Content: Article 243E of the Constitution of India deals with the duration of Panchayats and their extension. It specifies that Panchayats, unless dissolved earlier, shall continue for five years from the date of their first meeting. If a Panchayat is dissolved before the completion of its term, elections for the new Panchayat shall be completed within six months.

Article 243F
Title: Disqualifications for membership
Content: Article 243F of the Constitution of India deals with the disqualifications for membership in Panchayats. It specifies that a person shall be disqualified for being chosen as a member of a Panchayat if they hold any office of profit, are of unsound mind, stand disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State, or are disqualified for corrupt practices.

Article 243G
Title: Powers, authority, and responsibilities of Panchayats
Content: Article 243G of the Constitution of India deals with the powers, authority, and responsibilities of Panchayats. It specifies that subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow Panchayats with powers and responsibilities to enable them to function as institutions of self-governance for the areas they serve.

Article 243H
Title: Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats
Content: Article 243H of the Constitution of India deals with the powers of Panchayats to impose taxes and manage their funds. It specifies that the state Legislature may, by law, endow Panchayats with the power to levy, collect, and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls, and fees. The funds collected and grants received by Panchayats are used for local governance activities as per state laws.

Article 243I
Title: Audit of accounts of Panchayats
Content: Article 243I of the Constitution of India deals with the audit of accounts of Panchayats. It specifies that the state Legislature may, by law, provide for the maintenance and audit of accounts of Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts by auditors appointed by the state's Governor.

Article 243J
Title: Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial position
Content: Article 243J of the Constitution of India deals with the constitution of a Finance Commission for Panchayats. It specifies that the Governor of a State shall constitute a Finance Commission within one year from the commencement of the Constitution, and subsequently, every five years, to review the financial position of the Panchayats and make recommendations regarding the distribution of finances between the State and the Panchayats.

Article 243K
Title: Application to Union territories
Content: Article 243K of the Constitution of India deals with the application of the provisions relating to Panchayats to Union territories. It specifies that the provisions of Part IX of the Constitution, which include Articles 243 to 243I, shall apply to the Union territories with certain exceptions and modifications as the President may specify through an order.

Article 243L
Title: Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters
Content: Article 243L of the Constitution of India deals with the prohibition of interference by courts in electoral matters related to Panchayats. It specifies that no election to any Panchayat shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to an authority determined by the state Legislature.

Article 243M
Title: Part not to apply to certain areas
Content: Article 243M of the Constitution of India deals with the exclusion of certain areas from the provisions of Part IX related to Panchayats. It specifies that the provisions of Part IX shall not apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in Article 244(1) and the tribal areas in the states as specified in the Fifth Schedule.

Article 243N
Title: Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats
Content: Article 243N of the Constitution of India deals with the continuance of existing laws and Panchayats. It specifies that all the existing laws relating to Panchayats in the state, and the continuation of Panchayats functioning under such laws, shall continue to be in force until altered, repealed, or amended by the state Legislature.

Article 243O
Title: Bar on interference in electoral matters
Content: Article 243O of the Constitution of India deals with the prohibition of interference by courts in electoral matters related to municipalities. It specifies that no election to any municipality shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to an authority determined by the state Legislature.

Article 243P
Title: Continuance of existing laws and municipalities
Content: Article 243P of the Constitution of India deals with the continuance of existing laws and municipalities. It specifies that all the existing laws relating to municipalities in the state, and the continuation of municipalities functioning under such laws, shall continue to be in force until altered, repealed, or amended by the state Legislature.

Article 243Q
Title: Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial position
Content: Article 243Q of the Constitution of India deals with the constitution of a Finance Commission for municipalities. It specifies that the Governor of a State shall constitute a Finance Commission within one year from the commencement of the Constitution, and subsequently, every five years, to review the financial position of the municipalities and make recommendations regarding the distribution of finances between the State and the municipalities.

Article 243R
Title: Reservation of seats
Content: Article 243R of the Constitution of India deals with the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and women in municipalities. It specifies that seats shall be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population, and women shall also have seats reserved, not less than one-third of the total number of seats.

Article 243S
Title: Duration of Municipalities, etc.
Content: Article 243S of the Constitution of India deals with the duration of municipalities and the duration of their elected members. It specifies that every municipality shall continue for five years from the date of its first meeting. However, the state Legislature may dissolve a municipality before the completion of its term.

Article 243T
Title: Reservation of seats
Content: Article 243T of the Constitution of India deals with the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and women in Panchayats. It specifies that seats shall be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population, and women shall also have seats reserved, not less than one-third of the total number of seats.

Article 243U
Title: Duration of Panchayats, etc.
Content: Article 243U of the Constitution of India deals with the duration of Panchayats and the duration of their elected members. It specifies that every Panchayat shall continue for five years from the date of its first meeting. However, the state Legislature may dissolve a Panchayat before the completion of its term.

Article 243V
Title: Reservation of seats
Content: Article 243V of the Constitution of India deals with the reservation of offices of Chairpersons of Panchayats. It specifies that the offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or intermediate level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, and women in such manner as the state Legislature may provide.

Article 243W
Title: Powers, authority, and responsibilities of Panchayats
Content: Article 243W of the Constitution of India deals with the powers, authority, and responsibilities of Panchayats. It specifies that the Legislature of a State may endow Panchayats with powers and authority to enable them to function as institutions of self-government.

Article 243X
Title: Powers, Authority, and Responsibilities of Municipalities, etc.
Content: Article 243X of the Constitution of India deals with the powers, authority, and responsibilities of municipalities and other local authorities. It empowers the State Legislature to endow municipalities with powers and responsibilities for local governance, including the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice, and implementation of schemes for the economic development of weaker sections.

Article 243Y
Title: Continuance of Existing Laws and Panchayats
Content: Article 243Y of the Constitution of India deals with the continuance of existing laws and Panchayats (local self-government institutions). It states that any law relating to Panchayats that was in force before the enactment of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, shall continue to be in force until it is altered or repealed by a competent authority.

Article 243Z
Title: Bar to Interference by Courts in Electoral Matters
Content: Article 243Z of the Constitution of India pertains to the prohibition of interference by courts in electoral matters related to Panchayats (local self-government institutions). It states that no election to any Panchayat shall be questioned except by filing an election petition to a competent authority.

Article 243ZA
Title: Bar to Interference by Courts in Electoral Matters
Content: Article 243ZA of the Constitution of India pertains to the prohibition of interference by courts in electoral matters related to Municipalities. It states that no election to any Municipality shall be questioned except by filing an election petition to a competent authority.

Article 243ZB
Title: Powers to Authorize Taxes by Municipalities
Content: Article 243ZB of the Constitution of India empowers the Legislature of a State to authorize Municipalities to levy, collect, and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls, and fees for various purposes within their jurisdiction.

Article 243ZC
Title: Finance Commission to Review Financial Position
Content: Article 243ZC of the Constitution of India stipulates that the Finance Commission established under Article 243I shall also review the financial position of the Municipalities and make recommendations regarding financial arrangements for them.

Article 243ZD
Title: Committees for District Planning
Content: Article 243ZD of the Constitution of India mandates the creation of District Planning Committees (DPCs) in every State. These committees are responsible for consolidating the plans prepared by Panchayats and Municipalities in the district and formulating draft development plans.

Article 243ZE
Title: Audit of Accounts of Panchayats and Municipalities
Content: Article 243ZE of the Constitution of India mandates that the Governor of a State shall ensure the establishment of a State Finance Commission to review the financial position of Panchayats and Municipalities. The Commission provides recommendations on matters related to financial devolution, revenue sharing, and grants-in-aid.

Article 243ZF
Title: Bar to Interference by Courts in Electoral Matters
Content: Article 243ZF of the Constitution of India prohibits courts from interfering in matters related to the delimitation of constituencies, preparation of electoral rolls, and conduct of elections to Panchayats and Municipalities. This provision aims to uphold the integrity and autonomy of the electoral process at the grassroots level.

Article 243ZG
Title: Continuance of Existing Laws and Panchayats
Content: Article 243ZG of the Constitution of India deals with the continuance of existing laws related to Panchayats. It ensures that laws that were in force before the commencement of the Constitution's Seventy-third Amendment remain applicable until they are altered or repealed by the competent legislature.

Article 244
Title: Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas
Content: The provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply to the administration and control of the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State other than the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.

Article 244A
Title: Formation of an Autonomous State comprising certain tribal areas in Assam and creation of local Legislature or Council of Ministers or both therefor
Content: Article 244A of the Constitution of India pertains to the formation of an Autonomous State comprising specific tribal areas in Assam. It provides the President with the authority to specify the areas that will constitute the Autonomous State and determine the powers and responsibilities of the local Legislature or Council of Ministers.

Article 245
Title: Extent of laws made by the Parliament and by the Legislatures of States
Content: Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, and the Legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the State.

Article 246
Title: Subject-matter of laws made by the Parliament and by the Legislatures of States
Content: Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule (Union List). Such power shall also include the power of making any law imposing a tax not mentioned in either of those Lists.

Article 247
Title: Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain additional courts
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of any additional courts for the better administration of the laws made by Parliament or of any existing laws with respect to a matter enumerated in the Union List.

Article 248
Title: Residuary powers of legislation
Content: Parliament has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List.

Article 249
Title: Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the State List in the national interest
Content: If the Rajya Sabha approves by a resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, it is possible for the Parliament to make laws on matters enumerated in the State List.

Article 250
Title: Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State
Content: If two or more States express their consent, the Parliament can legislate on matters included in the State List, and any other State can adopt that legislation.

Article 251
Title: Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States
Content: If a law made by a State Legislature is inconsistent with a law made by Parliament on a subject within the Concurrent List, the Parliament law will prevail.

Article 252
Title: Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State
Content: If the legislatures of two or more States agree, Parliament can make laws on any subject enumerated in the State List for those States. Another State can also adopt such legislation if it chooses.

Article 253
Title: Legislation for giving effect to international agreements
Content: Parliament has the power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India to implement any international treaty, agreement, or convention.

Article 254
Title: Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States
Content: In case of inconsistency between laws made by the Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States on matters enumerated in the Concurrent List, the law made by the Parliament will prevail.

Article 255
Title: Legislation with respect to a matter in the State List in the course of employment in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State
Content: Notwithstanding anything in the preceding two articles (Article 253 and Article 254), neither the President nor the Legislature of a State shall be restricted in respect of any law which the President would be competent to enact or make if there were no article in this Constitution requiring the previous sanction of the President or such law to be reserved for the consideration of the President.

Article 256
Title: Obligation of States and the Union
Content: The executive power of every State shall be so exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws made by Parliament and any existing laws which apply in that State, and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as may appear to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose.

Article 257
Title: Control by the Union over States in certain cases
Content: The executive power of every State shall be so exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union, and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as may appear to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose.

Article 258
Title: Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain cases
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, with the consent of the Government of a State, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any matter to which the executive power of the Union extends.

Article 259
Title: Power of the President to communicate with State Governments
Content: The President may, by order, direct that any matter shall be referred to a State Government for the purpose of eliciting the views of that Government before the President takes any action under this Constitution in relation to that matter:

Article 260
Title: Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India
Content: Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of the Union extends to the giving of directions to a State as to the exercise of the executive power thereof if the same is necessary for the purpose of preventing any grave menace to the peace or good government of India or any part thereof.

Article 261
Title: Public acts, records and judicial proceedings
Content: Full faith and credit shall be given throughout the territory of India to public acts, records and judicial proceedings of the Union and of every State.

Article 262
Title: Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers or river valleys
Content: Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution or control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley.

Article 263
Title: Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council
Content: If it appears to the President that the public interests would be served by the establishment of a Council for the coordination of policy among the States with respect to any matter, it shall be lawful for the President to establish such a Council, and to define the nature of duties to be performed by it and its organization and procedure.

Article 264
Title: Inter-State Water Disputes
Content: Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution or control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley.

Article 265
Title: Taxes not to be levied save by authority of law
Content: No tax shall be levied or collected except by the authority of law.

Article 266
Title: Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the States
Content: Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Consolidated Fund of India and the Consolidated Fund of each State shall be in the custody of the President, and all revenues received by the Government of India or the Government of a State, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans shall form the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of the State, as the case may be.

Article 267
Title: Contingency Fund of India
Content: Parliament may by law establish a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be entitled the Contingency Fund of India into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the President to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the Parliament.

Article 268
Title: Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by the States
Content: Duties levied by the Government of India on goods, the net proceeds of which are assigned to the States or are appropriated to the States if Parliament by law so provides, shall be levied and collected by the Government of India, but shall be assigned to the States or appropriated to the States in accordance with such law.

Article 269
Title: Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the States
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 268, Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a tax levied by the Government of India is to be assigned to the States.

Article 270
Title: Taxes levied and distributed between the Union and the States
Content: All taxes and duties referred to in the Union List, except the duties and taxes referred to in Articles 268 and 269, respectively, surcharge on taxes and duties referred to in Article 271 and any cess levied for specific purposes under any law made by Parliament shall be levied and collected by the Government of India and distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in Article 272.

Article 271
Title: Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the Union
Content: Parliament may at any time increase any of the duties or taxes referred to in Articles 269 and 270 by a surcharge for purposes of the Union and the whole proceeds of any such surcharge shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.

Article 272
Title: Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the States
Content: Taxes which are levied and collected by the Government of India, but are assigned to the States under any law made by Parliament shall be distributed among the States in such manner and form as may be prescribed by such law.

Article 273
Title: Grants from the Union to certain States
Content: Parliament may, by law, make grants-in-aid to the States which are in need of such assistance and are unable to raise resources for development in accordance with the recommendations of the Finance Commission.

Article 274
Title: Prior recommendation of President required to Bills affecting taxation in which States are interested
Content: No Bill or amendment which imposes or varies a tax or duty in which States are interested shall be introduced in Parliament except on the recommendation of the President.

Article 275
Title: Grants from the Union to certain States
Content: Grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State out of the Consolidated Fund of India shall be charged upon the revenues of India.

Article 276
Title: Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments
Content: The power of the State to levy taxes on professions, trades, callings, and employments shall be subject to certain restrictions provided by Parliament.

Article 277
Title: Savings
Content: The taxes, duties, cesses, or fees which are payable to the Government of India or to the Government of a State under any law for the time being in force, including any law passed by the Parliament or by the Legislature of such State, shall continue to be levied and to be applied for the purposes for which they were so levied and applied before the commencement of this Constitution.

Article 278
Title: Inter-State Councils
Content: Parliament may by law establish an Inter-State Council for the purpose of fostering co-ordination among the States and between the States and the Union and for making recommendations with respect to any matter in the exercise of the legislative or executive powers of the Union and of the States.

Article 279
Title: Calculation of net proceeds, etc., of taxes
Content: The President shall within two years from the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year or at such earlier time as the President considers necessary, by order, cause to be constituted a Finance Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and four other members to be appointed by the President.

Article 280
Title: Finance Commission
Content: The President shall, within two years from the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year or at such earlier time as the President considers necessary, by order, constitute a Finance Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and four other members to be appointed by the President.

Article 281
Title: Grants from the Union to certain States
Content: The President may, if he is satisfied that a situation has arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of a State is threatened, or money for the purposes of the State is required to be raised, by order direct that the Government of India shall make a grant in advance to that State of sums from the Consolidated Fund of India.

Article 282
Title: Expenditure defrayable by the Government of India or the Government of a State out of its revenues
Content: The Government of India or the Government of a State may make any grants for any public purpose, notwithstanding that the purpose is not one with respect to which the Government of India or the Government of the State, as the case may be, may be able to make laws.

Article 283
Title: Custody of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and moneys credited to the public accounts
Content: All revenues received by the Government of India, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be entitled the "Consolidated Fund of India", and all revenues received by the Government of a State, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be entitled the "Consolidated Fund of the State".

Article 284
Title: Custody of suitors' deposits and other moneys received by public servants and courts
Content: All moneys received by or deposited with the Supreme Court or any other court established by or under any law made by Parliament or by any other authority, including any moneys required to be deposited by or under any order made by any court for the due execution of its decrees or orders, shall be paid into the public account of India or the public account of the State, as the case may be.

Article 285
Title: Exemption of property of the Union from State taxation
Content: The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or by any authority within a State.

Article 286
Title: Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of goods
Content: No law of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes place outside the State; or the tax on the sale or purchase of any goods inside the State has been levied, but not collected under the law of the State.

Article 287
Title: Exemption from taxes on electricity
Content: No tax shall be levied on any supply of electricity or on any sale or purchase of goods to a registered dealer for use by him in the production or manufacture of any goods or in mining or in the generation or distribution of electricity.

Article 288
Title: Exemption from taxation by States in certain cases
Content: No tax on the sale or purchase of goods shall be levied or collected by any State except by the authority of law. The Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in any of the ways mentioned in clause (2) or clause (3) of Article 286.

Article 289
Title: Exemption of property and income of a State from Union taxation
Content: The property and income of a State shall be exempt from Union taxation.

Article 290
Title: Adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions
Content: Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, Parliament may, at any time during the financial year during which this Constitution comes into operation and for three financial years next following, make by law provisions for the payment out of the Consolidated Fund of India of all or any expenses or pensions payable under this Constitution, if it is satisfied that the revenues of India are not adequate to meet all the expenses of the Government of India and of the States.

Article 291
Title: Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the People
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 81, the President may, if he is of the opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People, nominate not more than two members of that community to the House of the People.

Article 292
Title: Borrowing by the Government of India
Content: Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Government of India may borrow within such limits, if any, as may from time to time be fixed by Parliament by law and, if not so fixed, within such limits as may be determined by the President.

Article 293
Title: Borrowing by States
Content: Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of a State extends to borrowing within the territory of India upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the State within such limits, if any, as may from time to time be fixed by the Legislature of such State by law and, if not so fixed, within such limits as may be determined by the Governor.

Article 294
Title: Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in certain cases
Content: Where, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, the property and assets, whether within or outside the territory of India, vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India or the Government of any Part thereof, were, by virtue of the agreements entered into in that behalf between His Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom and the Government of India or the Government of the Indian State concerned, the property and assets of the Government of the Dominion of India or the Government of the Part of India or the Indian State, as the case may be, shall, as from the commencement of this Constitution, vest in the Government of India or the Government of the State, as the case may be.

Article 295
Title: Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in certain cases
Content: Where by virtue of the provisions of Part II of this Constitution any property or assets have, after the commencement of this Constitution, vested in the Government of India and any liabilities in respect of any such property or assets have become the liabilities of the Government of India, that Government shall, subject to any agreement entered into in that behalf with the Government of any State, be liable to refund to that State the share of the liabilities of that State in respect of that property or those assets as the case may be.

Article 296
Title: Property accruing by escheat or lapse or as bona vacantia
Content: Where any property in the territory of India is, after the commencement of this Constitution, held by the Government of India or the Government of a State or any other authority as trustee on behalf of any person, and such property, if it were in the possession of an individual, would have escheated to the Government or the Government of a State or any other authority, as the case may be, under the law relating to escheat or lapse of bona vacantia in force in the territory immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, then, if the property is on that date held by the Government of India or the Government of a State or any other authority aforesaid, the property shall be disposed of in accordance with such law, and where no such law is in force, the property shall be disposed of in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.

Article 297
Title: Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in certain cases
Content: All property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in the territory of India which, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, were vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India or the Government of any Part A State or Part C State or any Part B State or any Part D State or any territory which, under the provisions of the Constitution then in force, was administered as if it were a Province of India, or in any court or tribunal or other authority in the territory of India, shall, as from the commencement of this Constitution, vest in the Government of India, if the property is situated in a Part A State, or a Part C State or a Part D State, or in the Government of the State, if the property is situated in a Part B State.

Article 298
Title: Power to carry on trade, etc.
Content: The executive power of the Union and of each State shall extend to the carrying on of any trade or business and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the making of contracts for any purpose.

Article 299
Title: Contracts
Content: All contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union or of a State shall be expressed to be made by the President, or by the Governor of the State, as the case may be, and all such contracts and all assurances of property made in the exercise of that power shall be executed on behalf of the President or the Governor by such persons and in such manner as he may direct or authorize.

Article 300
Title: Suits and Proceedings
Content: Government of India may sue or be sued by the name of the Union of India and the Government of a State may sue or be sued by the name of the State and may, subject to any provisions which may be made by Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of such State enacted by virtue of powers conferred by this Constitution, sue or be sued in relation to their respective affairs in the like cases as the Dominion of India and the corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian States might have sued or been sued if this Constitution had not been enacted.

Article 300A
Title: Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law
Content: Article 300A of the Constitution of India ensures that no person shall be deprived of their property except by the authority of law. This article emphasizes the importance of due process and legal safeguards when it comes to the deprivation of property rights.

Article 301
Title: Freedom of trade, commerce, and intercourse throughout India
Content: Subject to the provisions of this Part, trade, commerce, and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free.

Article 302
Title: Power of Parliament to impose restrictions on trade and commerce
Content: Parliament may by law impose such restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce, or intercourse between one State and another or within any part of the territory of India as may be required in the public interest.

Article 303
Title: Restrictions on the legislative powers of the Union and of the States with regard to trade and commerce
Content: Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament may by law impose such restrictions on the powers of the Union or of the States as may be required in the public interest.

Article 304
Title: Restrictions on trade, commerce, and intercourse among states
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 301 or Article 303, the Legislature of a State may by law impose such restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce, or intercourse among states as may be required in the public interest.

Article 305
Title: Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.
Content: No law made by the Legislature of a State providing for the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein or for the extinguishment or modification of any such rights shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with or takes away or abridges any rights conferred by this Part.

Article 306
Title: Meaning of "financial year" in laws made by the Legislature of a State
Content: In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, "financial year" means the year commencing on the 1st day of April.

Article 307
Title: Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of Part XIII
Content: Parliament may by law provide for the appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of this Part and mayvest such authority with such powers and duties as may be necessary.

Article 308
Title: Interpretation of the provisions in Part XIII
Content: In this Part and in all other provisions of this Constitution relating to trade, commerce, and intercourse within the territory of India, the word 'State' includes the Government of India and the Government of any State.

Article 309
Title: Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the Union or a State
Content: Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Acts of the appropriate Legislature may regulate the recruitment, and conditions of service of persons appointed, to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State.

Article 310
Title: Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a State
Content: Except as expressly provided by this Constitution, every person who is a member of a defence service or of a civil service of the Union or of an all-India service or holds any post connected with defence or any civil post under the Union holds office during the pleasure of the President, and every person who is a member of a civil service of a State or holds any civil post under a State holds office during the pleasure of the Governor of the State.

Article 311
Title: Dismissal, removal, or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the Union or a State
Content: No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.

Article 312
Title: All-India Services
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, if the Council of States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament may by law create one or more All-India Services common to the Union and the States, and, subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to any such service.

Article 312A
Title: Reservation of Jobs in Services
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Parliament may, by law, provide for the reservation of appointments or posts in any public service under the State in favor of economically weaker sections of the society.

Article 313
Title: Transitional provisions
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the conditions of service of persons serving immediately before the commencement of this Constitution in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State shall not be varied to their disadvantage except with the previous approval of the President.

Article 314
Title: Appointment of permanent and non-permanent judges to the Federal Court and High Courts
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, in the case of the Federal Court, appointment of judges (including Chief Justice) and in the case of a High Court, appointment of Chief Justice and other judges shall be made by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India or, as the case may be, the Governor of the State and, in the case of appointment of a judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court.

Article 315
Title: Public Service Commissions for the Union and the States
Content: Subject to the provisions of this Article, there shall be a Public Service Commission for the Union and a Public Service Commission for each State.

Article 316
Title: Appointment and term of office of members
Content: The Chairman and other members of a Public Service Commission shall be appointed, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, by the President, and in the case of a State Commission, by the Governor of the State.

Article 317
Title: Prohibition of inter-State trade or commerce
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 301 or Article 303, the Parliament may by law impose such restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one State and another or within any part of the territory of India as may be required in the public interest.

Article 318
Title: Interpretation of the expression "public service"
Content: In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression "public service" means service in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State.

Article 319
Title: Oath of a member of the Election Commission of India
Content: Every member of the Election Commission of India shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

Article 320
Title: Functions of the Public Service Commissions
Content: It shall be the duty of the Union and the State Public Service Commissions to conduct examinations for appointments to the services of the Union and the services of the State respectively.

Article 321
Title: Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions
Content: Parliament may by law extend the functions of a Public Service Commission to the services and posts of any local authority or other body corporate constituted by law or of any public institution.

Article 322
Title: Provisions as to Judges of the Federal Court and proceedings before it
Content: The provisions of Article 50 and Article 51 of this Constitution shall apply in relation to the Judges of the Federal Court as they apply in relation to the Judges of the Supreme Court of India.

Article 323
Title: Administrative tribunals
Content: The appropriate Legislature may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation owned or controlled by the Government.

Article 323A
Title: Administrative Tribunals
Content: Parliament may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India.

Article 323B
Title: Tribunals for Other Matters
Content: Parliament may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by tribunals of any disputes, complaints, or other matters with respect to which it is competent to make laws, including the regulation of the jurisdiction and powers of such tribunals.

Article 324
Title: Superintendence, direction and control of elections
Content: The superintendence, direction, and control of the preparation of the electoral rolls and the conduct of all elections to the Parliament and to the Legislature of every State and of elections to the offices of President and Vice President held under this Constitution shall be vested in a Commission (Election Commission).

Article 325
Title: No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be included in a special, electoral roll on grounds of religion, race, caste or sex
Content: No person shall be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be included in, a special electoral roll for any constituency on the ground that he is not resident in the constituency.

Article 326
Title: Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of States to be on the basis of adult suffrage
Content: The elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of States shall be on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than eighteen years of age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election.

Article 327
Title: Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to elections to Legislatures
Content: Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and in so far as provision in that behalf is not made by Parliament, the Legislature of a State may, from time to time, by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the House or either House of the Legislature of the State including the preparation of electoral rolls and all other matters necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses.

Article 328
Title: Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the People
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 81, the President may, if he is of the opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People, nominate not more than two members of that community to the House of the People.

Article 329
Title: Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, no election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature of a State shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as may be provided for by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature.

Article 329A
Title: Reservation of Seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 81, the representation of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People shall not be less than the proportion of their population.

Article 330
Title: Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People
Content: Reserved seats shall be provided in the House of the People for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam, so far as it relates to the representation of that State.

Article 331
Title: Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the People
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 81, the President may, if he is of the opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People, nominate not more than two members of that community to the House of the People.

Article 332
Title: Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People
Content: Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People, as determined by the President, after consultation with the Election Commission.

Article 333
Title: Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the People
Content: Notwithstanding anything in Article 81, the President may, if he is of the opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People, nominate not more than two members of that community to the House of the People.

Article 334
Title: Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after fifty years
Content: Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the provisions of this Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the representation of the Anglo-Indian community by nomination in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of fifty years from the commencement of this Constitution.

Article 335
Title: Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services and posts
Content: The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of the efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.

Article 336
Title: Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain services
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, if he is of the opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the services under the Union, make such provision as he may deem necessary for the adequate representation of the community in the said services.

Article 337
Title: Special provision with respect to educational grants for the benefit of Anglo-Indian community
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, out of the Consolidated Fund of India, make any grants for the benefit of the Anglo-Indian community for the promotion of its educational and economic interests.

Article 338
Title: National Commission for Scheduled Castes
Content: There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes to exercise such powers and perform such functions as Parliament may by law assign to it.

Article 339
Title: Control of the Union Over the States in Relation to the Welfare of Scheduled Tribes
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law regulate the rights of any Ruler of an Indian State with respect to the administration of tribal areas in that State.

Article 340
Title: Appointment of a Commission to Investigate the Conditions of Backward Classes
Content: The President may appoint a Commission to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes and recommend steps for their advancement.

Article 341
Title: Scheduled Castes
Content: Article 341 of the Constitution of India empowers the President to specify castes, races, or tribes as Scheduled Castes, which are historically marginalized communities requiring special protective measures. The article aims to uplift and provide opportunities to these communities.

Article 342
Title: Scheduled Tribes
Content: Article 342 of the Constitution of India empowers the President to specify tribes or tribal communities as Scheduled Tribes. The article recognizes the need to protect and uplift these historically marginalized communities and provides them with special provisions and affirmative action measures.

Article 343
Title: Official Language of the Republic of India
Content: Article 343 of the Constitution of India designates Hindi in the Devanagari script as the official language of the Republic of India. However, it also recognizes English as an associate official language for a transitional period to facilitate communication between the central government and the states.

Article 344
Title: Commission and Committee of Parliament on Official Language
Content: Article 344 of the Constitution of India provides for the establishment of a Commission and a Committee of Parliament on Official Language. The President of India is required to appoint a Commission at the expiration of five years from the commencement of the Constitution and subsequently at intervals of ten years. The Commission's task is to make recommendations regarding the progressive use of Hindi as the official language, the language to be used for communication between the Union and the States, and other language-related matters.

Article 345
Title: Official Language or Languages of a State
Content: Article 345 of the Constitution of India empowers the legislature of a state to adopt one or more languages for official purposes within the state, in addition to the official language of the Union. This provision acknowledges the linguistic diversity within the country and grants states the flexibility to choose languages that are most suitable for their region.

Article 346
Title: Protection of Interests of Certain Scheduled Tribes
Content: Article 346 of the Constitution of India provides the President with the authority to specify the tribes or tribal communities that should be deemed as 'Scheduled Tribes' for a particular state or union territory. This provision allows for the identification and protection of the interests of specific tribes by granting them the benefits and safeguards outlined in the Constitution.

Article 347
Title: Special Provision for Scheduled Areas
Content: Article 347 of the Constitution of India empowers the President to direct the Governor of a state to ensure the provision of adequate representation to Scheduled Tribes in the legislative assembly of the state. This provision aims to ensure the political participation and representation of Scheduled Tribes in areas with substantial tribal populations.

Article 348
Title: Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.
Content: Article 348 of the Constitution of India deals with the language to be used in the Supreme Court, High Courts, and for Acts, Bills, and other official documents. It states that until Parliament provides otherwise, English shall be used for all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts for the purpose of any judgment, decree or order. Additionally, Acts, Bills, and official documents are to be translated into English if they are not already in English.

Article 349
Title: Special procedure for enactment of certain laws relating to language
Content: Article 349 of the Constitution of India deals with the special procedure for the enactment of certain laws relating to language. It provides that when a Bill is introduced in the Parliament to provide for the language to be used for any of the purposes mentioned in Article 346, it shall not be introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the President. Such a Bill also requires the prior permission of the President for its introduction in the House of the People (Lok Sabha).

Article 350
Title: Language to be used in representations for redress of grievances
Content: Article 350 of the Constitution of India pertains to the language to be used in representations for the redress of grievances. It ensures that citizens have the right to submit their grievances to the authorities in any of the languages used in the state or the English language, as per their choice. The State is obligated to provide adequate facilities for citizens to communicate in the language of their preference when addressing government offices for grievance redressal.

Article 350A
Title: Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary stage
Content: Article 350A of the Constitution of India deals with the provision of facilities for instruction in the mother tongue at the primary stage of education. It emphasizes that the state shall endeavor to provide opportunities for children to receive education in their mother tongue, as it is a crucial aspect of preserving linguistic and cultural diversity. This article recognizes the importance of making primary education accessible and understandable to children in their native language.

Article 350B
Title: Special Officer for linguistic minorities
Content: Article 350B of the Constitution of India deals with the appointment of a Special Officer for linguistic minorities. This article emphasizes the establishment of the office of a Special Officer, who will be responsible for investigating and monitoring matters related to the safeguards provided for linguistic minorities under the Constitution.

Article 351
Title: Directive for development of Hindi language
Content: Article 351 of the Constitution of India emphasizes the importance of promoting and developing the Hindi language. It states that it shall be the duty of the Union to promote the spread of the Hindi language, ensuring its enrichment by assimilating various linguistic and cultural influences.

Article 352
Title: Proclamation of Emergency
Content: Article 352 of the Constitution of India deals with the proclamation of Emergency. It grants the President the authority to declare a state of emergency if they are convinced that the security of India or any part thereof is threatened by war, external aggression, or armed rebellion.

Article 353
Title: Effect of Proclamation of Emergency
Content: Article 353 of the Constitution of India outlines the effect of a Proclamation of Emergency issued under Article 352. It states that while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the executive authority of the Union extends to the giving of directions to any state as to the manner in which the executive power of the state is to be exercised.

Article 354
Title: Application of the provisions of this Chapter to the Governor of a State
Content: Article 354 of the Constitution of India stipulates that the provisions of Chapter II of Part VI (which pertains to the State Executive) shall apply to the Governor of a State. This chapter includes Articles 155 to 161, which deal with the office of the Governor and its various aspects.

Article 355
Title: Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression and internal disturbance
Content: Article 355 of the Constitution of India places a duty upon the Union to protect every State from external aggression and internal disturbances. The Union government is obligated to ensure the security and stability of the states in order to maintain the overall integrity and sovereignty of the country.

Article 356
Title: Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in States
Content: Article 356 of the Constitution of India deals with the provisions to be applied when the constitutional machinery in a state fails to function as prescribed by the Constitution. This provision allows the President of India to assume direct control over the state's administration if the state government is unable to function according to constitutional provisions.

Article 357
Title: Exercise of legislative powers under Proclamation issued under Article 356
Content: Article 357 of the Constitution of India deals with the exercise of legislative powers by the President or other authority during the period of a Proclamation issued under Article 356. It empowers the President to authorize the Parliament to exercise the powers and functions of the state legislature. Additionally, it allows the Parliament to confer powers on the President to make laws for the state.

Article 358
Title: Suspension of provisions of Article 19 during emergencies
Content: Article 358 of the Constitution of India deals with the suspension of the right to freedom of speech and expression (guaranteed by Article 19) during a proclamation of emergency under Article 352. It states that while a proclamation of emergency is in operation, the President has the power to suspend the rights conferred by Article 19.

Article 359
Title: Suspension of enforcement of certain rights during emergencies
Content: Article 359 of the Constitution of India empowers the President to suspend the enforcement of fundamental rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution during the period of a proclamation of emergency under Article 352. This article allows the President to declare that the right to move any court for the enforcement of certain rights shall remain suspended for the duration of the emergency.

Article 360
Title: Provisions as to financial emergency
Content: Article 360 of the Constitution of India deals with the provisions related to a financial emergency. It empowers the President to proclaim a financial emergency if he/she is satisfied that the financial stability or credit of India or any part thereof is threatened. Such a proclamation allows the President to give directions to the states on financial matters and suspend the provisions related to the distribution of revenues between the Union and the states.

Article 361
Title: Protection of President and Governors and Rajpramukhs
Content: Article 361 of the Constitution of India provides certain immunities and privileges to the President, Governors of states, and Rajpramukhs of certain Indian states. It states that the President, Governors, and Rajpramukhs are immune from legal proceedings in any court during their term of office. However, after they cease to hold office, they can be sued or prosecuted in respect of acts done during their term with the previous permission of the President.

Article 362
Title: Provisions as to the Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas
Content: Article 362 of the Constitution of India deals with the administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas. It emphasizes that the provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply to the administration and control of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas. The President is empowered to make regulations for these areas to ensure the welfare and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes residing there.

Article 363
Title: Bar to interference by Courts in disputes arising out of certain treaties, agreements, etc.
Content: Article 363 of the Constitution of India restricts the jurisdiction of courts in matters related to disputes arising out of certain treaties, agreements, and covenants. The article states that such disputes cannot be called into question in any court of India, including the Supreme Court. The President has the authority to determine the extent to which and the manner in which the jurisdiction of courts is excluded in such matters.

Article 363A
Title: Restrictions on Disclosures of Information
Content: Article 363A of the Constitution of India imposes restrictions on the disclosure of information relating to disputes arising out of treaties, agreements, and covenants. This article prevents individuals from disclosing certain information in court proceedings, including details of negotiations, communications, and materials prepared for settlement of disputes. The objective is to maintain confidentiality and protect sensitive diplomatic and international relations information.

Article 364
Title: Special Provision as to major ports and aerodromes with respect to certain laws
Content: Article 364 of the Constitution of India empowers the President to issue certain directions for the efficient administration of major ports and aerodromes owned or maintained by the Government of India. This article allows the President to issue directions to ensure the proper functioning and development of these critical infrastructures.

Article 365
Title: Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions given by the Union
Content: Article 365 of the Constitution of India deals with the consequences when a state government fails to comply with or give effect to any directions given by the President of India. In such cases, the President may hold that a situation has arisen in which the government of the state cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.

Article 366
Title: Definitions
Content: Article 366 of the Constitution of India provides a comprehensive list of definitions for various terms used in the Constitution. These definitions are crucial to ensure clarity and consistency in the interpretation of the Constitution's provisions.

Article 367
Title: Provisions as to the Governor
Content: Article 367 of the Constitution of India deals with the interpretation of terms used in the Constitution and the role of the Governor in various contexts. It provides guidelines for interpreting certain expressions and phrases that appear in the Constitution.

Article 368
Title: Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure therefor
Content: Article 368 of the Constitution of India empowers the Parliament to amend the Constitution. It outlines the procedure for amending different provisions of the Constitution.

Article 369
Title: Temporary power to Parliament to make laws with respect to certain matters in the State List as if they were matters in the Concurrent List
Content: Article 369 of the Constitution of India grants temporary powers to the Parliament to legislate on certain matters in the State List as if they were in the Concurrent List, in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Article 370
Title: Temporary provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir
Content: Article 370 of the Constitution of India provides temporary provisions and special autonomy to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. It allows the state to have its own Constitution, autonomy over internal matters, and limited jurisdiction of the Indian Parliament.

Article 371
Title: Special provisions with respect to certain states
Content: Article 371 of the Constitution of India provides special provisions for certain states to address regional disparities and protect the interests of different regions. These provisions grant autonomy and special privileges to these states in matters like land ownership, cultural preservation, and employment opportunities.

Article 371A
Title: Special provisions with respect to the State of Nagaland
Content: Article 371A of the Constitution of India provides special provisions for the State of Nagaland. It grants the state certain autonomy in matters related to land and its resources, and it allows the Naga people to preserve their customary laws and practices.

Article 371B
Title: Special provisions with respect to the State of Assam
Content: Article 371B of the Constitution of India provides special provisions for the State of Assam. It grants certain powers to the President of India to safeguard the cultural, social, and economic interests of the region.

Article 371C
Title: Special provisions with respect to the State of Manipur
Content: Article 371C of the Constitution of India provides special provisions for the State of Manipur. It grants certain powers to the President of India to safeguard the cultural, social, and economic interests of the region.

Article 371D
Title: Special provisions with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh
Content: Article 371D of the Constitution of India provides special provisions for the State of Andhra Pradesh. It aims to ensure equitable opportunities in public employment and education for the people of the region.

Article 371E
Title: Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh
Content: Article 371E of the Constitution of India provides for the establishment of a Central University in the State of Andhra Pradesh. This provision aims to promote higher education and research in the region.

Article 371F
Title: Special Provisions for the State of Sikkim
Content: Article 371F of the Constitution of India contains special provisions for the State of Sikkim. These provisions aim to safeguard the interests and unique characteristics of the state.

Article 371G
Title: Special Provisions for Mizoram
Content: Article 371G of the Constitution of India contains special provisions for the state of Mizoram. These provisions are aimed at protecting the interests of the people of Mizoram and preserving the cultural and social identity of the state.

Article 371H
Title: Special Provisions for Arunachal Pradesh
Content: Article 371H of the Constitution of India contains special provisions for the state of Arunachal Pradesh. These provisions are intended to safeguard the rights, interests, and cultural identity of the people of Arunachal Pradesh.

Article 371I
Title: Special Provisions for Goa
Content: Article 371I of the Constitution of India contains special provisions for the state of Goa. These provisions aim to safeguard the unique culture, identity, and interests of the people of Goa.

Article 372
Title: Continuation of Existing Laws
Content: Article 372 of the Constitution of India deals with the continuation of existing laws after the adoption of the Constitution. It ensures that laws that were in force before the commencement of the Constitution continue to be in force until they are repealed or amended.

Article 373
Title: Power of President to Make Orders in Relation to Services
Content: Article 373 of the Constitution of India empowers the President to make orders to provide for equitable opportunities for people from different regions and communities in public services under the central government. These orders aim to ensure fair representation and address any imbalances in various government posts.

Article 374
Title: Provisions as to Judges of High Courts
Content: Article 374 of the Constitution of India lays out provisions regarding the appointment and qualifications of judges in High Courts. It grants the President the power to appoint, transfer, and remove judges of High Courts in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.

Article 375
Title: Courts of Criminal Jurisdiction
Content: Article 375 of the Constitution of India deals with the courts of criminal jurisdiction. It establishes that no court shall inquire into or pronounce any judgment on the proceedings of any military court-martial. However, this prohibition doesn't apply to the validity of the finding, sentence, or order passed by a military court-martial.

Article 376
Title: Provision for Special Courts for Certain Offences
Content: Article 376 of the Constitution of India empowers the Parliament to establish special courts for the trial of certain offences. These offences are specified in laws made by the Parliament. The special courts are intended to expedite the trial process and ensure swift justice for these particular offences.

Article 377
Title: Unlawful Activities
Content: Article 377 of the Constitution of India deals with unlawful activities and provides the Parliament with the power to prescribe punishment for such activities. It empowers the Parliament to enact laws that define and penalize actions that are considered unlawful and detrimental to the security and sovereignty of the nation.

Article 378
Title: Provisions as to Financial Emergency
Content: Article 378 of the Constitution of India deals with the provisions related to a Financial Emergency. It empowers the President of India, on the recommendation of the Union Cabinet, to declare a state of Financial Emergency in the country if the financial stability or credit of India is threatened.

Article 379
Title: Determination of Questions as to Disqualifications of Members
Content: Article 379 of the Constitution of India deals with the determination of questions related to disqualifications of members of the legislative bodies. It states that the President's decision on disqualification questions under the Tenth Schedule (Anti-Defection Law) shall be final and binding.

Article 380
Title: Special Provisions for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Services
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order, appoint at any time a commission to report on the administration of the Scheduled Areas and the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the States.

Article 381
Title: Special Provisions for Backward Classes in Services
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order, appoint at any time a commission to report on the administration of the Backward Classes in the States and the adequacy and impact of the special provisions made for them.

Article 382
Title: Power of the President to Make Regulations for Certain Union Territories
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, with respect to any Union territory or part thereof, make regulations for the peace, progress, and good government of the territory or part thereof, and any regulations so made may supersede any law made by Parliament or any other authority functioning within the territory or part thereof.

Article 383
Title: Power of the Governor to Make Regulations for Scheduled Areas in States
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Governor of a State may, with respect to any area in the State which is for the time being a scheduled area, by public notification, make regulations for the peace, progress, and good government of the scheduled area or any part thereof, and any regulations so made may repeal or amend any law made by the State Legislature or other authority functioning within the State.

Article 384
Title: Provisions as to Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes
Content: Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, make such provision as he may deem fit for the administration of scheduled areas and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes in the State or Union territory, including the prohibition or regulation of the transfer of land by or among members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area or areas and the restoration to any such member of any such land transferred in contravention of such provision.

Article 385
Title: State to consider special provisions for certain classes
Content: The State shall consider, in the preparation of plans for the economic development of the area or areas within its jurisdiction, the provision for a location in that area or areas of industries which are likely to bring about a rapid improvement in the economic conditions of the weaker sections of the people in those areas.

Article 386
Title: Promotion of cooperative societies
Content: The State shall promote the voluntary formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control, and professional management of cooperative societies.

Article 387
Title: Protection of indigenous cultures
Content: The State shall take measures to protect and preserve the distinct cultures, languages, and traditions of indigenous communities, ensuring their participation in decision-making processes that affect them.

Article 388
Title: Promotion of rural education
Content: The State shall endeavor to promote and provide quality education in rural areas, aiming to eliminate educational disparities between urban and rural regions.

Article 389
Title: Promotion of cottage industries
Content: The State shall encourage and promote cottage industries in order to provide employment opportunities and enhance economic growth, particularly in rural and remote areas.

Article 390
Title: Promotion of rural education
Content: The State shall strive to promote and enhance education in rural areas, aiming to eliminate illiteracy, improve access to quality education, and uplift the overall educational standards in such regions.

Article 391
Title: Protection of tribal rights
Content: The State shall ensure the protection and preservation of the rights and interests of tribal communities, including their culture, traditions, and lands, while promoting their overall socio-economic development.

Article 392
Title: Promotion of rural education
Content: The State shall endeavor to provide accessible and quality education in rural areas, ensuring that all children have the opportunity to receive basic education and acquire necessary skills.

Article 393
Title: Protection of indigenous cultures
Content: The State shall recognize and protect the unique cultural identities and traditions of indigenous communities, ensuring their participation in decisions affecting their cultural heritage.

Article 394
Title: Promotion of scientific research
Content: The State shall encourage and support scientific research and innovation in various fields, aiming to advance knowledge, technology, and national progress.

Article 395
Title: Protection of cultural heritage
Content: The State shall take measures to preserve and protect the rich cultural heritage of the nation, including monuments, artifacts, traditions, and languages, with a view to passing them on to future generations.